BY BBRTRAND RU8SBLL 



INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY 

THE ANALYSIS OF MIND 

OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 

AN OUTLINE OP PHILOSOPHY 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNIZ 

AN INQUIRY INTO MEANING AND TRUTH 

POWER 

IN PRAISE OF IDLENESS 
THE CONQUEST OF HAPPINESS 

SCEPTICAL ESSAYS 

THE SCIENTIFIC OUTLOOK 

MYSTICISM AND LOGIC 

MARRIAGE AND MORALS 

EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL OKDLK 

ON EDUCATION 

FREEDOM AND ORGANIZATION, l8l4~I<M4 
PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION 

ROADS TO FREEDOM 
JUSTICE IN WAR-FIMi: 

FREE THOUGHT AND OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA 
THE PROBLEM OF CHINA 

With Scott NcarinK 

BOLSHEVISM AND THE Wt*T 

With Dora Russell 

THE PROSPECTS Ol- INDUSTRIAL CIVILIZATION 



BERTRAND RUSSELL 

HISTORY OF 

WESTERN 
PHILOSOPHY 

and its Connection with Political 

and Social Circumstances from 

the Earliest Times to 

the Present Dav 



GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LTD 



FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1446 
SFCOND IMPRESSION 1947 

All rights resented 



1'RINTI.D IV URI-AT BKMAIS 
iff n-/'</tnf Imprint Type 

\\\ UN WIN bHOJHfcHS J, M m U 



PREFACE 

A FEW words of apology and explanation are called for if 
this book is to escape even more severe censure than it 
doubtless deserves. 

Apology is due to the specialists on various schools and indi- 
vidual philosophers. With the possible exception of Leibniz, 
every philosopher of whom I treat is better known to some others 
than to me. If, however, books covering a Wide field are to be 
written at all, it is inevitable, since we are not immortal, that those 
who write such books should spend less time on any one part 
than can be spent by a man who concentrates on a single author 
or a brief period. Some, whose scholarly austerity is unbending, 
will conclude that books covering a wide field should not be 
written at all, or, if written, should consist of monographs by a 
multitude of authors. There is, however, something lost when 
many authors co-operate. If there is any unity in the movement 
of history, if there is any intimate relation between what goes 
before and what comes later, it is necessary, for setting this forth, 
that earlier and later periods should be synthesized in a single 
mind. The student of Rousseau may have difficulty in doing 
justice to his connection with the Sparta of Plato and Plutarch; 
the historian of Sparta may not be prophetically conscious of 
Hobbcs and Fichte and Lenin. To bring out such relations is 
one of the purposes of this book, and it is a purpose which only 
a wide survey can fulfil. 

There are many histories of philosophy, but none of them, so 
far as I know, has quite the purpose that I have set myself. Philo- 
sophers are both effects and causes: effects of their social cir- 
cumstances and of the politics and institutions of their time; 
causes (if they are fortunate) of beliefs which mould the politics 
and institutions of later ages. In most histories of philosophy, 
each philosopher appears as in a vacuum; his opinions are set 
forth unrelated except, at most, to those of earlier philosophers. 
I have tried, on the contrary, to exhibit each philosopher, as far 
as truth permits, as an outcome of his milieu, a man in whom 
were crystallized and concentrated thoughts and feelings which, 
in a vague ahd diffused form, were common to the community 
of which he was a part. 

5 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

This has required the insertion of certain chapters of purely 
social history. No one can understand the Stoics and Epicureans 
without some knowledge of the Hellenistic age, or the scholastics 
without a modicum of understanding of the growth of the Church 
from the fifth to 'the thirteenth centuries. I have therefore set 
forth briefly those parts of the main historical outlines that seemed 
to me to have had most influence on philosophical thought, and 
I have done this with most fulness where the history may be 
expected to be unfamiliar to some readers for example, in regard 
to the early Middle Ages. But in these historical chapters I have 
rigidly excluded whatever seemed to have little or no bearing on 
contemporary or subsequent philosophy. 

The problem of selection, in such a book as the present, is 
very difficult. Without detail, a book becomes jejune and un- 
interesting; with detail, it is in danger of becoming intolerably 
lengthy. I have sought a compromise, by treating only those 
philosophers who seem to me to have considerable importance, 
and mentioning, in connection with them, such details as, even 
if not of fundamental importance, have value on account of some 
iDustrative or vivifying quality. 

Philosophy, from the earliest times, has been not merely an 
affair of the schools, or of disputation between a handful of 
learned men. It has been an integral part of the life of the com- 
munity, and as such I have tried to consider it. If there is any 
merit in this book, it is from this point of view that it is derived. 

This book owes its existence to Dr. Albert C. Barnes, having 
been originally designed and partly delivered as lectures at the 
Barnes Foundation in Pennsylvania. 

As in most of my work during the years since 1932, I have 
been greatly assisted in research and in many other ways by my 
wife, Patricia Russell. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER 



1 

II 
III 

IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 



XI 

XII 

XIII 

XIV 

XV 

XVI 

XVII 

XVIII 

XIX 

XX 

XXI 

XXII 

XXIII 

XXIV 



XXV 
XXVI 

XXVII 

txvm 

XXIX 
XXX 



Introduction 

BOOK ONE 

ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY 

Part i 
The Pre-Socratics 

The Rise of Greek Civilization 

The Milesian School 

Pythagoras 

Heraclitus 

Pannenides 

Empedocles 

Athens in Relation to Culture 

Anaxagoras 

The Atornists 

Protagoras 

Part 2 

Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
Socrates 

The Influence of Sparta 
The Sources of Plato's Opinions 
Plato's Utopia 
The Theory of Ideas 
Plato's Theory of Immortality 
Plato's Cosmogony 
Knowledge and Perception in Plato 
Aristotle's Metaphysics 
Aristotle's Ethics 
Aristotle's Politics 
Aristotle's Logic 
Aristotle's Physics 
Early Greek Mathematics and Astronomy 

Part 3 
Ancient Philosophy after Aristotle 

The Hellenistic World 

Cynics and Sceptics 

The Epicureans 

Stoitism 

The Roman Empire in Relation to Culture 

Plotinua 



PAGE 
10 



21 

8 

57 
6? 
72 

77 
81 

84 
94 



i oz 



129 
141 

'54 

165 

171 
182 

'95 
207 
218 
226 
231 



241 
252 
263 

*75 
294 
308 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

CHAPTER PAGE 

BOOK TWO 

CATHOLIC PHILOSOPHY 

Introduction 322 
Part i 

The Fathers 

I The Religious Development of the Jews 328 

II Christianity During the First Four Centuries 344 

III Three Doctors of the Church 354 

IV St. Augustine's Philosophy and Theology 372 
V The Fifth and Sixth Centuries ' 386 

VI St. Benedict and Gregory the Great 395 

Part 2 
The Schoolmen 

VII The Papacy in the Dark Apes 408 

VIII John the Scot 421 

IX Ecclesiastical Reform in the Eleventh Ccntuiv 428 

X Mohammedan Culture and Philosophy 440 

XI The Twelfth Century ' 450 

XII The Thirteenth Century 4^3 

XIII St. Thomas Aquinas 474 

XIV Franciscan Schoolmen 48'* 
XV The Eclipse of the Papacy 499 



BOOK TIIRFh 

MODERN PHILOSOPHY 

Part i 
/'Vow the Renaissance tu Hume 

I General Characteristics 51 1 

11 The Italian Renaissance ^i(> 

III Machiavelli 525 

IV Erasmus and More 533 
V The Reformation and Counter-Reformation 544 

VI The Rise of Science 547 

VII Francis Bacon 563 

VIII Hobbca's Leviathan 568 

IX Descartes 580 

X Spinoza 592 

XI Leibniz 604 

b 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGB 

XII Philosophical Liberalism 620 

XIII Locke's Theory of Knowledge 628 

XIV Locke's Political Philosophy 642 
XV Locke's Influence 666 

XVI Berkeley 673 

XVII Hume 685 

Part 2 
From Rousseau to the Present Day 

XVIII The Romantic Movement 701 

XIX Rousseau 711 

XX Kant 728 

XXI Currents of Thought in the Nineteenth Century 746 

XXII Hegel 757 

XXIII Byron 774 

XXIV Schopenhauer 781 
XXV Nietzsche 788 

XXVI The Utilitarians 801 

XXVII Karl Marx 810 

XXVIII Bergson 819 

XXIX William James 839 

XXX JohnDewey 847 

XXXI The Philosophy of Logical Analysis 857 



INTRODUCTION 

E I \HE conceptions of life and the world which we call 

I "philosophical" are a product of two factors: one, inherited 

JL religious and ethical conceptions; the other, the sort of 

investigation which may be called "scientific," using this word in 

its broadest sense. Individual philosophers have differed widely 

in regard to the proportions in which these two factors entered 

into their systems, but it is the presence of both, in some degree, 

that characterizes philosophy. 

"Philosophy" is a word which has been used in many ways, 
some wider, some narrower. I propose to use it in a very wide 
sense, which I will now try to explain. 

Philosophy, as I shall understand the word, is something inter- 
mediate between theology and science. Like theology, it consists 
of speculations on matters as to which definite knowledge has, so 
far, been unascertainable ; but like science, it appeals to human 
reason rather than to authority, whether that of tradition or that 
of revelation. All definite knowledge so I should contend 
belongs to science ; all dogma as to what surpasses definite know- 
ledge belongs to theology. But between theology and science there 
is a No Man's Land, exposed to attack from both sides; this No 
Man's Land is philosophy. Almost all the questions of most 
interest to speculative minds are such as science cannot answer, 
and the confident answers of theologians no longer seem so con- 
vincing as they did in former centuries. Is the world divided into 
mind and matter, and, if so, what is mind and what is matter? Is 
mind subject to matter, or is it possessed of independent powers ? 
Has the universe any unity or purpose? Is it evolving towards 
some goal ? Are there really laws of nature, or do we believe in 
them only because of our innate love of order ? Is man what he 
seems to the astronomer, a tiny lump of impure carbon and water 
impotently crawling on a small and unimportant planet ? Or is he 
what he appears to Hamlet ? Is he perhaps both at once ? Is there 
a way of living that is noble and another that is base, or are all 
ways of living merely futile? If there is a way of living that is 
noble, in what does it consist, and how shall we achieve it? Must 
the good be eternal in order to deserve to be valuc'd, or is it worth 
seeking even if the universe is inexorably moving toward? death ? 

10 



INTRODUCTION 

Is there such a thing as wisdom, or is what seems such merely 
the ultimate refinement of folly? To such questions no answer 
can be found in the laboratory. Theologies have professed to give 
answers, all too definite; but their very definiteness causes modern 
minds to view them with suspicion. The studying of these 
questions, if not the answering of them, is the business of 
philosophy. 

Why, then, you may ask, waste time on such insoluble problems ? 
To this one may answer as a historian, or as an individual facing 
the terror of cosmic loneliness. 

The answer of the historian, in so far as I am capable of giving 
it, will appear in the course of this work. Ever since men became 
capable of free speculation, their actions, in innumerable impor- 
tant respects, have depended upon their theories as to the world 
and human life, as to what is good and what is evil. This is as 
true in the present day as at any former time. To understand an 
age or a nation, we must understand its philosophy, and to under- 
stand its philosophy we must ourselves be in some degree philo- 
sophers. There is here a reciprocal causation: the circumstances 
of men's lives do much to determine their philosophy, but, con- 
versely, their philosophy does much to determine their circum- 
stances. This interaction throughout the centuries will be the 
topic of the following pages. 

There is also, however, a more personal answer. Science tells 
us what we can know, but what we can know is little, and if we 
forget how much we cannot know we become insensitive to many 
things of very great importance. Theology, on the other hand, 
induces a dogmatic belief that we have knowledge where in fact 
we have ignorance, and by doing so generates a kind of impertinent 
insolence towards the universe. Uncertainty, in the presence of 
vivid hopes and fears, is painful, but must be endured if we wish 
to live without the support of comforting fairy tales. It is not 
good either to forget the questions that philosophy asks, or to 
persuade ourselves that we have found indubitable answers to 
them. To teach how to live without certainty, and yet without 
being paralysed by hesitation, is perhaps the chief thing that 
philosophy, in our age, can still do for those who study it. 

Philosophy^ as distinct from theology, began in Greece in the 
sixth century B.C. After running its course in antiquity, it was 
again submerged by theology as Christianity rose and Rome fell. 

xx 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Its second great period, from the eleventh to the fourteenth cen- 
turies, was dominated by the Catholic Church, except for a few 
great rebels, such as the Emperor Frederick II (1195-1250). This 
period was brought to an end by the confusions that culminated 
in the Reformation. The third period, from the seventeenth 
century to the present day, is dominated, more than either of its 
predecessors, by science; traditional religious beliefs remain 
important, but are felt to need justification, and are modified 
wherever science seems to make this imperative. Few of the 
philosophers of this period are orthodox from a Catholic stand- 
point, and the secular State is more important in their speculations 
than the Church. 

Social cohesion and individual liberty, like religion and science, 
are in a state of conflict or uneasy compromise throughout the 
whole period. In Greece, social cohesion was secured by loyalty 
to the City State; even Aristotle, though in his time Alexander 
was making the City State obsolete, could see no merit in any 
other kind of polity. The degree to which the individual's liberty 
was curtailed by his duty to the City varied widely. In Sparta he 
had as little liberty as in modern Germany or Russia; in Athens, 
in spite of occasional persecutions, citizens had, in the best period, 
a very extraordinary freedom from restrictions imposed by the 
State. Greek thought down to Aristotle is dominated by religious 
and patriotic devotion to the City ; its ethical systems arc adapted 
to the lives of citizens and have a large political element. When 
the Greeks became subject, first to the Macedonians, and then to 
the Romans, the conceptions appropriate to their days of inde- 
pendence were no longer applicable. This produced, on the one 
hand, a loss of vigour through the breach with tradition, and, on 
the other hand, a more individual and less social ethic. The 
Stoics thought of the virtuous life as a relation of the soul to 
God, rather than as a relation of the citizen to the State. They 
thus prepared the way for Christianity, which, like Stoicism, was 
originally unpolitical, since, during its first three centuries, its 
adherents were devoid of influence on government. Social cohesion, 
during the six and a half centuries from Alexander to Constantine, 
was secured, not by philosophy and not by ancient loyalties, but 
by force, first that of armies and then that of civil administration. 
Roman armies, Roman roads, Roman law, and ifoman officials 
first created and then preserved a powerful centralized. State. 

12 



INTRODUCTION 

Nothing was attributable to Roman philosophy, since there was 
none. 

During this long period, the Greek ideas inherited from the age 
of freedom underwent a gradual process of transformation. Some 
of the old ideas, notably those which we should regard as speci- 
fically religious, gained in relative importance; others, more 
rationalistic, were discarded because they no longer suited the 
spirit of the age. In this way the later pagans trimmed the Greek 
tradition until it became suitable for incorporation in Christian 
doctrine. 

Christianity popularized an important opinion, already implicit 
in the teaching of the Stoics, but foreign to the general spirit of 
antiquity I mean, the opinion that a man's duty to God is more 
imperative than his duty to the State. 1 This opinion that "we 
ought to obey God rather than Man/' as Socrates and the Apostles 
said survived the conversion of Constantine, because the early 
Christian emperors were Arians or inclined to Arianism. When 
the emperors became orthodox, it fell into abeyance. In the 
Byzantine Empire it remained latent, as also in the subsequent 
Russian Empire, which derived its Christianity from Constan- 
tinople. 2 But in the West, where the Catholic emperors were 
almost immediately replaced (except in parts of Gaul) by heretical 
barbarian conquerors, the superiority of religious to political 
allegiance survived, and to some extent still survives. 

The barbarian invasion put an end, for six centuries, to the 
civilization of western Europe. It lingered in Ireland until the 
Danes destroyed it in the ninth century; before its extinction 
there it produced one notable figure, Scotus Erigena. In the 
Eastern Empire, Greek civilization, in a desiccated form, survived, 
as in a museum, till the fall of Constantinople in 1453, but nothing 
of importance to the world came out of Constantinople except an 
artistic tradition and Justinian's Codes of Roman law. 

During the period of darkness, from the end of the fifth century 
to the middle of the eleventh, the western Roman world under- 
went some very interesting changes. The conflict between duty to 

1 This opinion was not unknown in earlier times: it is stated, for 
example, in the Antigone of Sophocles. But before the Stoics those who 
held it were fei%. 

* That is why the modem Russian does not think that we ought to 
obey dialectical materialism rather than Stalin. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

God and duty to the State, which Christianity had introduced, 
took the form of a conflict between Church and king. The eccle- 
siastical jurisdiction of the Pope extended over Italy, France, and 
Spain, Great Britain and Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia, and 
Poland. At first, outside Italy and southern France, his control 
over bishops and abbots was very slight, but from the time of 
Gregory VII (late eleventh century) it became real and effective. 
From that time on, the clergy, throughout western Europe, 
formed a single organization directed from Rome, seeking power 
intelligently and relentlessly, and usually victorious, until after the 
year 1300, in their conflicts with secular rulers. The conflict 
between Church and State was not only a conflict between clergy 
and laity ; it was also a renewal of the conflict between the Mediter- 
ranean world and the northern barbarians. The unity of the 
Church echoed the unity of the Roman Empire ; its liturgy was 
Latin, and its dominant men were mostly Italian, Spanish, or 
southern French. Their education, when education revived, was 
classical; their conceptions of law and government would have 
been more intelligible to Marcus Aurelius than they were to 
contemporary monarchs. The Church represented at once 
continuity with the past and what was most civilized in the 
present. 

The secular power, on the contrary, was in the hands of kings 
and barons of Teutonic descent, who endeavoured to preserve 
what they could of the institutions that they had brought out of 
the forests of Germany. Absolute power was alien to those institu- 
tions, and so was what appeared to these vigorous conquerors as 
a dull and spiritless legality. The king had to share his power 
with the feudal aristocracy, but all alike expected to be allowed 
occasional outbursts of passion in the form of war, murder, pillage, 
or rape. Monarchs might repent, for they were sincerely pious, 
and, after all, repentance was itself a form of passion. But the 
Church could never produce in them the quiet regularity of good 
behaviour which a'modern employer demands, and usually obtains, 
of his employees. What was the use of conquering the world if 
they could not drink and murder and love as the spirit moved 
them? And why should they, with their armies of proud knights, 
submit to the orders of bookish men, vowed to celibacy and 
destitute of armed force? In spite of ecclesiastic^ disapproval, 
they preserved the duel and trial by battle, and they developed 



INTRODUCTION 

tournaments and courtly love. Occasionally, in a fit of rage, they 
would even murder eminent churchmen. 

All the armed force was on the side of the kings, and yet the 
Church was victorious. The Church won, partly because it had 
almost a monopoly of education, partly because the kings were 
perpetually at war with each other, but mainly because, with very 
few exceptions, rulers and people alike profoundly believed that 
the Church possessed the power of the keys. The Church could 
decide whether a king should spend eternity in heaven or in hell ; 
the Church could absolve subjects from the duty of allegiance, 
and so stimulate rebellion. The Church, moreover, represented 
order in place of anarchy, and consequently won the support of 
the rising mercantile class. In Italy, especially, this last con- 
sideration was decisive. 

The Teutonic attempt to preserve at least a partial independence 
of the Church expressed itself not only in politics, but also in 
art, romance, chivalry, and war. It expressed itself very little in 
the intellectual world, because education was almost wholly con- 
fined to the clergy. The explicit philosophy of the Middle Ages 
is not an accurate mirror of the times, but only of what was 
thought by one party. Among ecclesiastics, however especially 
among the Franciscan friars a certain number, for various 
reasons, were at variance with the Pope. In Italy, moreover, 
culture spread to the laity some centuries sooner than it did 
north of the Alps. Frederick II, who tried to found a new religion, 
represents the extreme of anti-papal culture; Thomas Aquinas, 
who was born in the kingdom of Naples where Frederick II was 
supreme, remains to this day the classic exponent of papal philo- 
sophy. Dante, some fifty years later, achieved a synthesis, and 
gave the only balanced exposition of the complete medieval world 
of ideas. 

After Dante, both for political and for intellectual reasons, the 
medieval philosophical synthesis broke down. It had, while it 
lasted, a quality of tidiness and miniature completeness; whatever 
the system took account of was placed with precision with relation 
to the other contents of its very finite cosmos. But the Great 
Schism, die conciliar movement, and the Renaissance papacy led 
up to the Reformation, which destroyed the unity of Christendom 
and the scholastic theory of government that centred round the 

Pope. In the Renaissance period new knowledge, both of antiquity 



15 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and of the earth's surface, made men tired of systems, which were 
felt to be mental prisons. The Copernican astronomy assigned to 
the earth and to man a humbler position than they had enjoyed 
in the Ptolemaic theory. Pleasure in new facts took the place, 
among intelligent men, of pleasure in reasoning, analysing, and 
systematizing. Although in art the Renaissance is still orderly, in 
thought it prefers a large and fruitful disorder. In this respect, 
Montaigne is the most typical exponent of the age. 

In the theory of politics, as in everything except art, there was 
a collapse of order. The Middle Ages, though turbulent in prac- 
tice, were dominated in thought by a passion for legality and by 
a very precise theory of political power. All power is ultimately 
from God ; He has delegated power to the Pope in sacred things 
and to the Emperor in secular matters. But Pope and Emperor 
alike lost their importance during the fifteenth century. The Pope 
became merely one of the Italian princes, engaged in the incredibly 
complicated and unscrupulous game of Italian power politics. 
The new national monarchies in France, Spain, and England had, 
in their own territories, a power with which neither Pope nor 
Emperor could interfere. The national State, largely owing to 
gunpowder, acquired an influence over men's thoughts and feelings 
which it had not had before, and which progressively destroyed 
what remained of the Roman belief in the unity of civilization. 

This political disorder found expression in Machiavelli's Prince. 
In the absence of any guiding principle, politics becomes a naked 
struggle for power; The Prince gives shrewd advice as to how to 
play this game successfully. What had happened in die great age 
of Greece happened again in Renaissance Italy: traditional moral 
restraints disappeared, because they were seen to be associated 
with superstition; the liberation from fetters made individuals 
energetic and creative, producing a rare florescence of genius ; but 
the anarchy and treachery which inevitably resulted from the 
decay of morals made Italians collectively impotent, and they fell, 
like the Greeks, under the domination of nations less civilized 
than themselves but not so destitute of social cohesion. 

The result, however, was less disastrous than in the case of 
Greece, because the newly powerful nations, with the exception 
of Spain, showed themselves as capable of great achievement as 
the Italians had been. 

From the sixteenth century onward, the history of European 

,6 



INTRODUCTION 

thought is dominated by the Reformation. The Reformation was 
a complex many-sided movement, and owed its success to a 
variety of causes. In the main, it was a revolt of the northern 
nations against the renewed dominion of Rome. Religion was the 
force that had subdued the North, but religion in Italy had 
decayed: the papacy remained as an institution, and extracted a 
huge tribute from Germany and England, but these nations, 
which were still pious, could feel no reverence for the Borgias and 
Medicis, who professed to save souls from purgatory in return for 
cash which they squandered on luxury and immorality. National 
motives, economic motives, and moral motives all combined to 
strengthen the revolt against Rome. Moreover the Princes soon 
perceived that, if the Church in their territories became merely 
national, they would be able to dominate it, and would thus 
become much more powerful at home than they had been while 
sharing dominion with the Pope. For all these reasons, Luther's 
theological innovations were welcomed by rulers and peoples alike 
throughout the greater part of northern Europe. 

The Catholic Church was derived from three sources. Its sacred 
history was Jewish, its theology was Greek, its government and 
canon law were, at least indirectly, Roman. The Reformation 
rejected the Roman elements, softened the Greek elements, and 
greatly strengthened the Judaic elements. It thus co-operated with 
the nationalist forces which were undoing the work of social 
cohesion which had been effected first by the Roman Empire and 
then by the Roman Church. In Catholic doctrine, divine revelation 
did not end with the scriptures, but continued from age to age 
through the medium of the Church, to which, therefore, it was 
the duty of the individual to submit his private opinions. Pro- 
testants, on the contrary, rejected the Church as a vehicle of 
revelation ; truth was to be sought only in the Bible, which each 
man could interpret for himself. If men differed in their interpre- 
tation, there was no divinely appointed authority to decide the 
dispute. In practice, the State claimed the right that had formerly 
belonged to the Church, but this was a usurpation. In Protestant 
theory, there should be no earthly intermediary between the soul 
and God. 

The effects of this change were momentous. Truth was no 
longer to be ascertained by consulting authority, but by inward 

meditation, There was a tendency, quickly developed, towards 



7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

anarchism in politics, and, in religion, towards mysticism, which 
had always fitted with difficulty into the framework of Catholic 
orthodoxy. There came to be not one Protestantism, but a multi- 
tude of sects ; not one philosophy opposed to scholasticism, but as 
many as there were philosophers ; not, as in the thirteenth century, 
one Emperor opposed to the Pope, but a large number of heretical 
kings. The result, in thought as in literature, was a continually 
deepening subjectivism, operating at first as a wholesome liberation 
from spiritual slavery, but advancing steadily towards a personal 
isolation inimical to social sanity. 

Modern philosophy begins with Descartes, whose fundamental 
certainty is the existence of himself and his thoughts, from which 
the external world is to be inferred. This was only the first stage 
in a development, through Berkeley and Kant, to Fichte, for whom 
everything is only an rruiii..*!. :> oft!:? * so. This was insanity, and, 
from this extreme, philosophy has been attempting, ever since, to 
escape into the world of everyday common sense. 

With subjectivism in philosophy, anarchism in politics goes 
hand in hand. Already during Luther's lifetime, unwelcome and 
unacknowledged disciples had developed the doctrine of Ana- 
baptism, which, for a time, dominated the city of Miinster. The 
Anabaptists repudiated all law, since they held that the good man 
will be guided at every moment by the Holy Spirit, who cannot 
be bound by formulas. From this premiss they arrive at com- 
munism and sexual promiscuity ; they were therefore exterminated 
after a heroic resistance. But their doctrine, in softened forms, 
spread to Holland, England and America; historically, it is the 
source of Quakerism. A fiercer form of anarchism, no longer con- 
nected with religion, arose in the nineteenth century. In Russia, 
in Spain, and to a lesser degree in Italy, it had considerable 
success, and to this day it remains a bugbear of the American 
immigration authorities. This modern form, though anti-religious, 
has still much of the spirit of early Protestantism ; it differs mainly 
in directing against secular governments the hostility that Luther 
directed against popes. 

Subjectivity, once let loose, could not be confined within limits 
until it had run its course. In morals, the Protestant emphasis on 
the individual conscience was essentially anarchic. Habit and 
custom were so strong that, except in occasional outbreaks such 
as that of Mtinstcr, the disciples of individualism in ethics con- 

18 



INTRODUCTION 

tinued to act in a manner which was conventionally virtuous. But 
this was a precarious equilibrium. The eighteenth-century cult of 
"sensibility" began to break it down: an act was admired, not for 
its good consequences, or for its conformity to a moral code, but 
for die emotion that inspired it. Out of this attitude developed the 
cult of the hero, as it is expressed by Carlyle and Nietzsche, and 
the Byronic cult of violent passion of no matter what kind. 

The romantic movement, in art, in literature, and in politics, is 
hound up with this subjective way of judging men, not as members 
of a community, but as aesthetically delightful objects of con- 
templation. Tigers are more beautiful than sheep, but we prefer 
them behind bars. The typical romantic removes the bars and 
enjoys the magnificent leaps with which the tiger annihilates the 
sheep. He exhorts men to imagine themselves tigers, and when he 
succeeds the results are not wholly pleasant. 

Against the more insane forms of subjectivism in modern times 
there have been various reactions. First, a half-way compromise 
philosophy, the doctrine of liberalism, which attempted to assign 
the respective spheres of government and the individual. This 
begins, in its modern form, with Locke, who is as much opposed 
to "enthusiasm" the individualism of the Anabaptists as to 
absolute authority and blind subservience to tradition. A more 
thoroughgoing revolt leads to the doctrine of State worship, 
which assigns to the State the position that Catholicism gave 
to the Church, or even, sometimes, to God. Hobbes, Rousseau, 
and Hegel represent different phases of this theory, and their 
doctrines are embodied practically in Cromwell, Napoleon, and 
modern Germany. Communism, in theory, is far removed from 
such philosophies, but is driven, in practice, to a type of com- 
munity very similar to that which results from State worship. 

Throughout this long development, from 600 B.C. to the present 
day, philosophers have been divided into those who wished to 
tighten social bonds and those who wished to relax them. With 
this difference others have been associated. The disciplinarians 
have advocated some system of dogma, either old or new, and 
have therefore been compelled to be, in a greater or less degree, 
hostile to science, since their dogmas could not be proved empiri- 
cally. They have almost invariably taught that happiness is not 
the good, but that "nobility" or "heroism" is to be preferred. 
'1 'hey .have had a sympathy with the irrational parts of human 

19 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

nature, since they have felt reason to be inimical to social cohesion. 
The libertarians, on the other hand, with the exception of the 
extreme anarchists, have tended to be scientific, utilitarian, 
rationalistic, hostile to violent passion, and enemies of all the 
more profound forms of religion. This conflict existed in Greece 
before the rise of what we recognize as philosophy, and is already 
quite explicit in the earliest Greek thought. In changing forms, 
it has persisted down to the present day, and no doubt will persist 
for many ages to come. 

It is clear that each party to this dispute as to all that persist 
through long periods of time is partly right and partly wrong. 
Social cohesion is a necessity, and mankind has never yet succeeded 
in enforcing cohesion by merely rational arguments. Every com- 
munity is exposed to two opposite dangers; ossification through 
too much discipline and reverence for tradition, on the one hand; 
on the other hand, dissolution, or subjection to foreign conquest, 
through the growth of an individualism and personal independence 
that makes co-operation impossible. In general, important civili- 
zations start with a rigid and superstitious system, gradually 
relaxed, and leading, at a certain stage, to a period of brilliant 
genius, while the good of the old tradition remains and the evil 
inherent in its dissolution has not yet developed. But as the evil 
unfolds, it leads to anarchy, thence, inevitably, to a new tyranny, 
producing a new synthesis secured by a new system of dogma. 
The doctrine of liberalism is an attempt to escape from this 
endless oscillation. The essence of liberalism is an attempt to 
secure a social order not based on irrational dogma, and insuring 
stability without involving more restraints than are necessary 
for the preservation of the community. Whether this attempt 
can succeed only the future can determine. 



20 



Book One ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY 

Part i. The Pre-Socratics 

Chapter I 
THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

IN all history, nothing is so surprising or so difficult to account 
for as the sudden rise of civilization in Greece. Much of what 
makes civilization had already existed for thousands of years in 
Egypt and in Mesopotamia, and had spread thence to neighbouring 
countries. But certain elements had been lacking until the Greeks 
supplied them. What they achieved in art and literature is familiar 
to even-body, but what they did in the purely intellectual realm 
is even more exceptional. They invented mathematics 1 and 
science and philosophy ; they first wrote history fcsx opposed to 
mere annals; they speculated freely about the nature of the world 
and the ends of life, without being bound in the fetters of any 
inherited orthodoxy. What occurred was so astonishing that, until 
very recent times, men were content to gape and talk mystically 
about the Greek genius. It is possible, however, to understand 
the development of Greece in scientific terms, and it is well worth 
while to do so. 

Philosophy begins with Thalcs, who, fortunately, can be dated 
by the fact that he predicted an eclipse which, according to the 
astronomers, occurred in the year 585 B.C. Philosophy and science 
which were not originally separate were therefore born 
together at the beginning of the sixth century. What had been 
happening in Greece and neighbouring countries before this 
lime? Any answer must be in part conjectural, but archaeology, 
during the present century, has given us much more knowledge 
than was possessed by our grandfathers. 

1 Arithmetic* and some geometry existed among die Egyptians and 
Babylonians, but mainly in the form of rules of thumb. Dqductive 
reasoning from general premisses was a Greek innovation. 

21 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The art of writing was invented in Egypt about the year 
4000 B.C., and in Mesopotamia not much later. In each country 
writing began with pictures of the objects intended. These 
pictures quickly became conventionalized, so that words were 
represented by ideograms, as they still are in China. In the course 
of thousands of years, this cumbrous system developed into 
alphabetic writing. 

The early development of civilization in Egypt and Meso- 
potamia was due to the Nile, the Tigris, and the Euphrates, 
which made agriculture very easy and very productive. The 
civilization was in many ways similar to that which the Spaniards 
found in Mexico and Peru. There was a divine king, with despotic 
powers; in Egypt, he owned all the land. There was a polytheistic 
religion, with a supreme god to whom the king had a specially 
intimate relation. There was a military aristocracy, and also a 
priestly aristocracy. The latter was often able to encroach on the 
royal power, if the king was weak or if he was engaged in a 
difficult war. The cultivators of the soil were serfs, belonging 
to the king, the aristocracy, or the priesthood. 

There was a considerable difference between Egyptian and 
Babylonian theology. The Egyptians were preoccupied with 
death, and believed that the souls of the dead descend into the 
underworld, where they are judged by Osiris according to the 
manner of their life on earth. They thought that the soul would 
ultimately return to the body; this led to mummification and 
to the construction of splendid tomks. The pyramids were built 
by various kings at the end of the fourth millennium B.C. and 
the beginning of the third. After this time, Egyptian civilization 
became more and more stereotyped, and religious conservatism 
made progress impossible. About 1800 B.C. Epypt was conquered 
by Semites named Hyksos, who ruled the country for about 
two centuries. They left no permanent mark on Epypt, but their 
presence there must have helped to spread Egyptian civilization 
in Syria ami Palestine. 

Babylonia had a more warlike development than Egypt. At 
first, the ruling race were not Semites, but "Sumcrtans," whose 
origin is unknown. They invented cuneiform writing, which the 
conquering Semites took over from them. There was a period 
when there ucrc various independent cities whicfi fought with 
each other, but in the end Babylon became supreme and <*ntab* 



THE RISE OP GREEK CIVILIZATION 

lished an empire. The gods of other cities became subordinate, 
and Marduk, the god of Babylon, acquired a position like that 
later held by Zeus in the Greek pantheon. The same sort of 
thing had happened in Egypt, but at a much earlier time. 

The religions of Egypt and Babylonia, like other ancient 
religions, were originally fertility cults. The earth was female, 
the sun male. The bull was usually regarded as an embodiment 
of male fertility, and bull-gods were common. In Babylon, 
Ishtar, the earth-goddess, was supreme among female divinities. 
Throughout western Asia, the Great Mother was worshipped 
under various names. When Greek colonists in Asia Mjnor 
found temples to her, they named her Artemis and took over 
the existing cult. This is the origin of "Diana of the Ephesians." 1 
Christianity transformed her into the Virgin Mary, and it was a 
Council at Ephesus that legitimated the title "Mother of God" 
as applied to Our Lady. 

Where a religion was bound up with the government of an 
empire, political motives did much to transform its primitive 
features. A god or goddess became associated with the State, and 
had to give, not only an abundant harvest, but victory in war. 
A rich priestly caste elaborated the ritual and the theology, and 
fitted together into a pantheon the several divinities of the com- 
ponent parts of the empire. 

Through association with government, the gods also became 
associated with morality. Lawgivers received their codes from a 
god; thus a breach of the law became an impiety. The oldest 
legal code still known is that of Hammurabi, king of Babylon, 
about 2100 B.C. ; this code was asserted by the king to have been 
delivered to him by Marduk. The connection between religion 
and morality became continually closer throughout ancient times. 

Babylonian religion, unlike that of Egypt, was more concerned 
with prosperity in this world than with happiness in the next. 
Magic, divination, and astrology, though not peculiar to Baby- 
lonia, were more developed there than elsewhere, and it was 
chiefly through Babylon that they acquired their hold on later 
antiquity. From Babylon come some things that belong to science: 
the division of the day into twenty-four hours, and of the circle 

1 Diana wa* the I*atin equivalent of Artemis. It is Artemis who is 
mentioned in the Greek Testament where^our translation speaks of 
Diana* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

into 360 degrees ; also the discovery of a cycle in eclipses, which 
enabled lunar eclipses to be predicted with certainty, and solar 
eclipses with some probability. This Babylonian knowledge, as 
we shall see, was acquired by Thales. 

The civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia were agricultural, 
and those of surrounding nations, at first, were pastoral. A new 
element came with the development of commerce, which was at 
first almost entirely maritime. Weapons, until about 1000 B.C., 
were made of bronze, and nations which did not have the neces- 
sary metals on their own territory were obliged to obtain them 
by trade or piracy. Piracy was a temporary expedient, and where 
social and political conditions were fairly stable, commerce was 
found to be more profitable. In commerce, the island of Crete 
seems to have been the pioneer. For about eleven centuries, say 
from 2500 B.C. to 1400 B.C., an artistically advanced culture, 
called the Minoan, existed in Crete. What survives of Cretan 
art gives an impression of cheerfulness and almost decadent 
luxury, very different from the terrifying gloom of Egyptian 
temples. 

Of this important civilization almost nothing was known until 
the excavations of Sir Arthur Evans and others. It was a maritime 
civilization, in close touch with Egypt (except during the time of 
the Hyksos). From Egyptian pictures it is evident that the very 
considerable commerce between Egypt and Crete was carried 
on by Cretan sailors; this commerce reached its maximum 
about 1500 B.C. The Cretan religion appears to have had some 
affinities with the religions of Syria and Asia Minor, but in art 
there was more affinity with Egypt, though Cretan art was very 
original and amazingly full of life. The centre of the Cretan 
civilization was the so-called "palace of Minos"at Knossos,of which 
memories lingered in the traditions of classical Greece. The palaces 
of Crete were very magnificent, but were destroyed about the 
end of the fourteenth century B.C., probably by invaders from 
Greece. The chronology of Cretan history is derived from Egyp- 
tian objects found in Crete, and Cretan objects found in 
Egypt ; throughout, our knowledge is dependent on archaeological 
evidence. 

The Cretans worshipped a goddess, or perhaps several goddesses. 
The most indubitable goddess was the "Mistress of Animals," 
who was a huntress, and probably the source of the classical 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

Artemis. 1 She apparently was also a mother; the only male deity, 
apart from the "Master of Animals," is her young son. There is 
some evidence of belief in an after life, in which, as in Egyptian 
belief, deeds on earth receive reward or retribution. But on the 
whole the Cretans appear, from their art, to have been cheerful 
people, not much oppressed by gloomy superstitions. They were 
fond of bull-fights, at which female as well as male toreadors 
performed amazing acrobatic feats. Sir Arthur Evans thinks that 
the bull-fights were religious celebrations, and that the performers 
belonged to the highest nobility, but this view is not generally 
accepted. The surviving pictures are full of movement and realism. 

The Cretans had a linear script, but it has not been deciphered. 
At home they were peaceful, and their cities were un walled; 
no doubt they were defended by sea power. 

Before the destruction of the Minoan culture, it spread, about 
1600 B.C., to the mainland of Greece, where it survived, through 
gradual stages of modification, until about 900 B.C. This mainland 
civilization is called the Mycenaean; it is known through the 
tombs of kings, and also through fortresses on hill-tops, which 
show more fear of war than had existed in Crete. Both tombs 
and fortresses remained to impress the imagination of classical 
Greece. The older art products in the palaces are either actually 
of Cretan workmanship, or closely akin to those of Crete. The 
Mycenaean civilization, seen through a haze of legend, is that 
which is depicted in Homer. 

There is much uncertainty concerning the Mycenaeans. Did 
they owe their civilization to being conquered by the Cretans? 
Did they speak Greek, or were they an earlier indigenous race? 
No certain answer to these questions is possible, but there is 
evidence which makes it probable that they were conquerors 
who spoke Greek, and that at least the aristocracy consisted of 
fair-haired invaders from the North, who brought the Greek 
language with them. 8 The Greeks came to Greece in three 
successive waves, first the lonians, then the Achaeans, and last 
the Dorians. The lonians appear, though conquerors, to have 

1 She has a male twin or consort, the "Master of Animals/' but he is 
less prominent. It was at a later date that Artemis was identified with the 
Great Mother %f Asia Minor. 

1 See The Minoan- Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek 
Religion, by Martin P. Nilsson, p. 1 1 M. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

adopted the Cretan civilization pretty completely, as, later, the 
Romans adopted the civilization of Greece. But the lonians were 
disturbed, and largely dispossessed, by their successors, the 
Achaeans. The Achaeans are known, from the Hittite tablets 
found at Boghaz-Keui, to have had a large organized empire 
in the fourteenth century B.C. The Mycenaean civilization, 
which had been weakened by the warfare of the lonians and 
Achaeans, was practically destroyed by the Dorians, the last 
Greek invaders. Whereas previous invaders had largely adopted 
the Minoan religion, the Dorians retained the original Indo- 
European religion of their ancestors. The religion of Mycenaean 
times, however, lingered on, especially in the lower classes, and 
the religion of classical Greece was a blend of the two. In fact 
some of the classical goddesses were of Mycenaean origin. 

Although the above account seems probable, it must be re- 
membered that we do not know whether the Mycenaeans were 
Greeks or not. What we do know is that their civilization decayed, 
that about the time when it ended iron superseded bronze, 
and that for some time sea supremacy passed to the Phoenicians. 

Both during the later part of the Mycenaean age and after its 
end, some of the invaders settled down and became agriculturists, 
while some pushed on, first into the islands and Asia Minor, 
then into Sicily and southern Italy, where they founded cities 
that lived by maritime commerce. It was in these maritime cities 
that the Greeks first made qualitatively new contributions to 
civilization ; the supremacy of Athens came later, and was equally 
associated, when it came, with naval power. 

The mainland of Greece is mountainous and largely infertile. 
There are, however, many fertile valleys, with easy accx*ss to the 
sea, but cut off by the mountains from easy land communication 
with each other. In these valleys little separate communities grew 
up, living by agriculture, and centring round a town, generally 
close to the sea. In such circumstances it was natural that, as 
soon as the population of any community grew too great for its 
internal resources, those who could not live on the land should 
take to seafaring. The cities of the mainland founded colonies, 
often in places where it was much easier to find subsistence than 
it had been at home. Thus in the earliest historical period the 
Greeks of Asia Minor, Sicily, and Italy were much richer than 
those of the Greek mainland. 

36 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

The social system was very different in different parts of 
Greece. In Sparta, a small aristocracy subsisted on the labour of 
oppressed serfs of a different race; in the poorer agricultural 
regions, the population consisted mainly of fanners cultivating 
their own land with the help of their families. But where commerce 
and industry flourished, the free citizens grew rich by the em- 
ployment of slaves male in the mines, female in the textile 
industry. These slaves were, in Ionia, of the surrounding bar- 
barian population, and were, as a rule, first acquired in war. 
With increasing wealth went increasing isolation of respectable 
women, who in later times had little part in the civilized aspects 
of Greek life except in Sparta and Lesbos. 

There was a very general development, first from monarchy 
to aristocracy, then to an alternation of tyranny and democracy. 
The kings were not absolute, like those of Egypt and Babylonia; 
they were advised by a Council of Elders, and could not transgress 
custom with impunity. "Tyranny" did not mean necessarily 
bad government, but only the rule of a man whose claim to 
power was not hereditary. "Democracy" meant government 
by all the citizens, among whom slaves and women were not 
included. The early tyrants, like the Medici, acquired their 
power through being the richest members of their respective 
plutocracies. Often the source of their wealth was the ownership 
of gold and silver mines, made the more profitable by the new 
institution of coinage, which came from the kingdom of Lydia, 
adjacent to Ionia. 1 Coinage seems to have been invented shortly 
before 700 B.C. 

One of the most important results, to the Greeks, of commerce 
or piracy at first the two are scarcely distinct was the acqui- 
sition of the art of writing. Although writing had existed for 
thousands of years in Egypt and Babylonia, and the Minonn 
Cretans had a script (which has not been deciphered), there is 
no conclusive evidence that the Greeks acquired alphabetic 
writing until about the tenth century B.C. They learnt the art 
from the Phoenicians, who, like the other inhabitants of Syria, 
were exposed to both Egyptian and Babylonian influences, and 
who held the supremacy in maritime commerce until the rise 
of the Greek cities of Ionia, Italy, and Sicily. In the fourteenth 
century, writirffc to Ikhnaton (the heretic king of Egypt), Syrians 
1 Sec P. N. Ure, The Origin of Tyranny. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

still used the Babylonian cuneiform; but Hiram of Tyre (969- 
936) used the Phoenician alphabet, which probably developed out 
of the Egyptian script. The Egyptians used, at first, a pure picture 
writing; gradually the pictures, much conventionalized, came to 
represent syllables (the first syllables of the names of the things 
pictured), and at last single letters, on the principle of "A was 
an Archer who shot at a frog." 1 This last step, which was not 
taken with any completeness by the Egyptians themselves, but 
by the Phoenicians, gave the alphabet with all its advantages. 
The Greeks, borrowing from the Phoenicians, altered the alphabet 
to suit their language, and made the important innovation of 
adding vowels instead of having only consonants. There can be 
no doubt that the acquisition of this convenient method of 
writing greatly hastened the rise of Greek civilization. 

The first notable product of the Hellenic civilization was 
Homer. Even-thing about Homer is conjectural, but there is a 
widely held opinion that he was a series of poets rather than an 
individual. According to those who hold this opinion, the Iliad 
and the Odyssey between them took about two hundred years 
to complete, some say from 750 lo 550 B.r., 2 while others hold 
that "Homer" was nearly complete at the end of the eighth 
century. 3 The Homeric poems, in their present form, were 
brought to Athens by Peisistratus, who reigned (with inter- 
missions) from 560 to 527 B.C. From his time onward, the Athe- 
nian youth learnt Homer by heart, and this was the most important 
part of their education. In some parts of Greece, notably in Sparta, 
Homer had not the same prestige until a later date. 

The Homeric poems, like the courtly romances of the later 
Middle Ages, represent the point of view of a civilized aristocracy, 
which ignores as plebeian various superstitions that arc still 
rampant among the populace. In much later times, many of these 
superstitions rose again to the light of day. Guided by anthropology, 
many modern writers have come to the conclusion that Homer, 
so far from being primitive, was an expurgator, a kind of eighteenth 
century rationalizer of ancient myths, holding up an upper-class 

1 For instance, "Gimel," the third letter of the Hebrew alphabet, 
means "camel," and the iign for it is a conventionalized picture of a 
camel. 

1 Beloch, Gruchischf Ge$chithte t chap. xii. 

Kottovtieflf, History of the Ancient World, Vol. I. p. 390.. 



THE RISK OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

ideal of urbane enlightenment. The Olympian gods, who represent 
religion in Homer, were not the only objects of worship among the 
Greeks, either in his time or later. There were other darker and 
more savage elements in popular religion, which were kept at 
bay by the Greek intellect at its best, but lay in wait to pounce 
in moments of weakness or terror. In the time of decadence, 
beliefs which Homer had discarded proved to have persisted, 
half buried, throughout the classical period. This fact explains 
many things that would otherwise seem inconsistent and sur- 
prising. 

Primitive religion, everywhere, was tribal rather than personal. 
Certain rites were performed, which were intended, by sympa- 
thetic magic, to further the interests of the tribe, especially in 
respect of fertility, vegetable, animal, and human. The winter 
solstice was a time when the sun had to be encouraged not to 
k r o on diminishing in strength; spring and harvest also called 
for appropriate ceremonies. These were often such as to generate 
a great collective excitement, in which individuals lost their 
sense of separatcness and felt themselves at one with the whole 
tribe. All over the world, at a certain stage of religious evolution, 
sacred animals and human beings were ceremonially killed and 
eaten. In different regions, this stage occurred at very different 
dates. Human sacrifice usually lasted longer than the sacrificial 
eating of human victims; in Greece it was not yet extinct at the 
beginning of historical times. Fertility rites without such cruel 
aspects were common throughout Greece; the Eleusinian mys- 
teries, in particular, were essentially agricultural in their symbolism. 

It must he admitted that religion, in Homer, is not very religious. 
The gods are completely human, differing from men only in 
being immortal and possessed of superhuman powers. Morally, 
there is nothing to be said for them, and it is difficult to see how 
they can have inspired much awe. In some passages, supposed 
to be late, they are treated with Voltairean irreverence. Such 
genuine religious feeling as is to be found in Homer is less con- 
cerned with the gods of Olympus than with more shadowy 
beings such as Fate or Necessity or Destiny, to whom even Zeus 
is subject. Fate exercised a great influence on all Greek thought, 
and perhaps was one of the sources from which science derived 
the belief in natural law. 

1 lomeric gods were the gods of a conquering aristocracy, 

29 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

not the useful fertility gods of those who actually tilled the soil. 
As Gilbert Murray says r 1 

"The gods of most nations claim to have created the world. 
The Olympians make no such claim. The most they ever did was 
to conquer it. ... And when they have conquered their kingdoms, 
what do they do? Do they attend to the government? Do they 
promote agriculture? Do they practise trades and industries? 
Not a bit of it. Why should they do any honest work? They 
find it easier to live on the revenues and blast with thunderbolts 
the people who do not pay. They are conquering chieftains, 
royal buccaneers. They fight, and feast, and play, and make 
music; they drink deep, and roar with laughter at the lame smith 
who waits on them. They are never afraid, except of their own 
king. They never tell lies, except in love and war." 

Homer's human heroes, equally, are not very well behaved. 
The leading family is the House of Pelops, but it did not succeed 
in setting a pattern of happy family life. 

"Tantalos, the Asiatic founder of the dynasty, began its career 
by a direct offence airainst the gods; some said, by trying to 
cheat them into eating human flesh, that of his o\vn son Pelops. 
Pelops, having been miraculously restored to life, offended in 
his turn. He won his famous chariot-race against Oinomans, 
king of Pisa, by the connivance of the latter's charioteer, Myrtibs, 
and then got rid of his confederate, whom he had promised to 
reward, by flinging him into the sea. The curse descended to 
his sons, Atreus and Thyestes, in the form of what the Greeks 
called ate, a strong if not actually irresistible impulse to crime. 
Thyestes corrupted his brother's wife and thereby managed 
to steal the Muck* of the family, the famous golden-fleeced ram. 
Atreus in turn secured his brother's banishment, and recalling 
him under pretext of a reconciliation, feasted him on the flesh 
of his own children. The curse was now inherited by Atreus' 
son Agamemnon, who offended Artemis by killing a sacred stag, 
sacrificed his own daughter Iphigcnia to appease the goddess 
and obtain a safe passage to Troy for his fleet, and was in turn 
murdered by his faithless wife Klytaimnestra and her paramour 
Aigisthos, a surviving son of Thyestes. Orestes, Agamemnon's son, 
in turn avenged his father by killing his mother and Aigisthos. " 8 

1 Fh f Stages of Greek Religion, p. 67. 

1 Primitive Culture in Greece, IJ. J. Rose, 1925, p. 193. 

3 



THE RISE OP GREEK CIVILIZATION 

Homer as a finished achievement was a product of Ionia, i.e. of 
a part of Hellenic Asia Minor and the adjacent islands. Some time 
during the sixth century at latest, the Homeric poems became 
fixed in their present form. It was also during this century that 
Greek science and philosophy and mathematics began. At the 
same time events of fundamental importance were happening 
in other parts of the world. Confucius, Buddha, and Zoroaster, 
if they existed, probably belong to the same century. 1 In the 
middle of the century the Persian Empire was established by 
Cyrus; towards its close the Greek cities of Ionia, to which the 
Persians had allowed a limited autonomy, made a fruitless rebel- 
lion, which was put down by Darius, and their best men became 
exiles. Several of the philosophers of this period were refugees, 
who wandered from city to city in the still unenslaved parts of 
the Hellenic world, spreading the civilization that, until then, 
had been mainly confined to Ionia. They were kindly treated 
in their wanderings. Xcnophanes, who flourished in the later 
part of the sixth century, and who was one of the refugees, says: 
"This is the sort of thing we should say by the fireside in the 
winter-time, as we lie on soft couches, after a good meal, drinking 
sweet wine and crunching chickpeas: 'Of what country are you, 
and how old are you, good Sir? And how old were you when the 
Mcde appeared? 1 " The rest of Greece succeeded in preserving 
its independence at the battles of Salamis and Plataea, after 
which Ionia was liberated for a time.* 

Greece \vas divided into a large number of small independent 
states, each consisting of a city with some agricultural territory 
surrounding it. The level of civilization was very different in 
different parts of the Greek world, and only a minority of cities 
contributed to the total of Hellenic achievement. Sparta, of which 
I shall have much to say later, was important in a military sense, 
but not culturally. Corinth was rich and prosperous, a great 
commercial centre, but not prolific in great men. 

Then there were purely agricultural rural communities, such 

1 Zoroaster's date, however, is very conjectural. Some place it as early 
as looo u.c. See Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. IV, p. 207. 

1 As a result of the defeat of Athens by Sparta, the Persians regained 
the whole coast of Asia Minor, to which their right was acknowledged in 
the Peace oi Antalcidas (387-6 B.C.). About fifty years later, they were 
ncorportteti in Alexander's empire. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as the proverbial Arcadia, which townsmen imagined to be 
idyllic, but which really was full of ancient barbaric horrors. 

The inhabitants worshipped Hermes and Pan, and had a 
multitude of fertility cults, in which, often, a mere square pillar 
did duty in place of a statue of the god. The goat was the symbol 
of fertility, because the peasants were too poor to possess bulls. 
When food was scarce, the statue of Pan was beaten. (Similar 
things are still done in remote Chinese villages.) There was a clan 
of supposed were-wolves, associated, probably, with human 
sacrifice and cannibalism. It was thought that whoever tasted the 
flesh of a sacrificed human victim became a were-wolf. There 
was a cave sacred to Zeus Lykaios (the wolf- Zeus); in this cave 
no one had a shadow, and whoever entered it died within a year. 
AH this superstition was still flourishing in classical times. 1 

Pan, whose original name (some say) was "Paon", meaning the 
feeder or shepherd, acquired his better-known title, interpreted 
as meaning the All-God, when his worship was adopted by 
Athens in the fifth century, after the Persian war.- 

There was, however, in ancient Greece, much that we can feel 
to have been religion as we understand the term. This was con- 
nected, not with the Olympians, but with Dionysus, or Bacchus, 
whom we think of most naturally as the somewhat disreputable- 
god of wine and drunkenness. The way in which, out of his 
worship, there arose a profound mysticism, which greatly influ- 
enced many of the philosophers, and even had a part in shaping 
Christian theology, is very remarkable, and must be understood 
by anyone who wishes to study the development of (ireck 
thought. 

Dionysus, or Bacchus, was originally a Thracian god. The 
Thracians were very much less civilized than the Greeks, who 
regarded them as barbarians. Like all primitive agriculturists, 
they had fertility cults, and a god who promoted fertility. Mis 
name was Bacchus. It was never quite clear whether Bacchus 
had the shape of a man or of a bull. When they discovered how 
to make beer, they thought intoxication divine, and gave honour 
to Bacchus. When, later, they came to know the vine and to learn 
to drink wine, they thought even better of him. His functions in 
promoting fertility in general became somewhat subordinate 

1 ROM, Primitive Greece, p. 65 (I. 

1 J. . Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, p. 651 

3* 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

to his functions in relation to the grape and the divine madness 
produced by wine. 

At what date his worship migrated from Thrace to Greece is 
not known, but it seems to have been just before the beginning 
of historical times. The cult of Bacchus was met with hostility 
by the orthodox, but nevertheless it established itself. It con- 
tained many barbaric elements, such as tearing wild animals 
to pieces and eating the whole of them raw. It had a curious 
element of feminism. Respectable matrons and maids, in large 
companies, would spend whole nights on the bare hills in dances 
which stimulated ecstasy, and in an intoxication perhaps partly 
alcoholic, but mainly mystical. Husbands found the practice an- 
noying, but did not dare to oppose religion. Both the beauty and 
the savagery of the cult are set forth in the Bacchae of Euripides. 

The success of Dionysus in Greece is not surprising. Like all 
communities that have been civilized quickly, the Greeks, or at 
least a certain proportion of them, developed a love of the primi- 
tive, and a hankering after a more instinctive and passionate 
way of life than that sanctioned by current morals. To the man 
or woman who, by compulsion, is more civilized in behaviour 
than in feeling, rationality is irksome and virtue is felt as a burden 
and a slavery. This leads to a reaction in thought, in feeling, and 
in conduit. It is the reaction in thought that will specially concern 
us, but something must first be said about the reaction in feeling 
and conduct. 

The civilized man is distinguished from the savage mainly by 
prudence^ or, to use a slightly wider term, forethought. He is 
willing to endure present pains for the sake of future pleasures, 
even if the future pleasures are rather distant. This habit began to 
be important with the rise of agriculture; no animal and no 
savage would work in the spring in order to have food next 
winter, except for a few purely instinctive forms of action, such 
as bees making honey or squirrels burying nuts. In these cases, 
there is no forethought ; there is a direct impulse to an act which, 
to the human spectator, is obviously going to prove useful later 
on. True forethought only arises when a man does something 
towards which no impulse urges him, because his reason tells 
him that he will profit by it at some future date. Hunting requires 
no forethought* because it is pleasurable ; but tilling the soil is 
labour, and cannot be done from spontaneous impulse. 

tf mary o/ Wnt** PAtfe***? 33 B 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Civilization checks impulse not only through forethought, 
which is a self-administered check, but also through law, custom, 
and religion. This check it inherits from barbarism, but it makes 
it less instinctive and more systematic. Certain acts are labelled 
criminal, and are punished ; certain others, though not punished 
by law, are labelled wicked, and expose those who arc guilty of 
them to social disapproval. The institution of private property 
brings with it the subjection of women, and usually the creation 
of a slave class. On the one hand the purposes of the community 
are enforced upon the individual, and, on the other hand the 
individual, having acquired the habit of viewing his life as a 
whole, increasingly sacrifices his present to his future. 

It is evident that this process can be carried too far, as it is, for 
instance, by the miser. But without going to such extremes 
prudence may easily involve the loss of some of the best things 
in life. The worshipper of Dionysus reacts against prudence. In 
intoxication, physical or spiritual, he recovers an intensity of 
feeling which prudence had destroyed; he finds the world full 
of delight and beauty, and his imagination is suddenly liberated 
from the prison of every-day preoccupations. The Bacchic 
ritual produce^ what was called "enthusiasm," which means, 
etymologically, having the god enter into the worshipper, who 
believed that he became one wilh the god. Much of what is 
greatest in human achievement involves some element of intoxi- 
cation, 1 some sweeping away of prudence by pasbion. Without 
the Bacchic element, life would be uninteresting; with it, it is 
dangerous. Prudence versus passion is a conflict that runs through 
history. It is not a conflict in which we ought to side wholly 
with either party. 

In the sphere of thought, sober civilization is roughly synony- 
mous with science. But science, unadulterated, is not satisfying; 
men need also passion and art and religion. Science may set 
limits to knowledge, but should not set limits to imagination. 
Among Greek philosophers, as among those of later times, there 
were those who were primarily scientific and those who were 
primarily religious; the latter owed much, directly or indirectly, 
to the religion of Bacchus. This applies especially to Plato, and 
through him to those later developments which were ultimately 
embodied in Christian theology, 

1 I mean mental intoxication, not intoxication by ilcohof. 

34 



THE RISE OP GREEK CIVILIZATION 

The worship of Dionysus in its original form was savage, and 
in many ways repulsive. It was not in this form that it influenced 
the philosophers, but in the spiritualized form attributed to 
Orpheus, which was ascetic, and substituted mental for physical 
intoxication. 

. Orpheus is a dim but interesting figure. Some hold that he was 
an actual man, others that he was a god or an imaginary hero. 
Traditionally, he came from Thrace, like Bacchus, but it seems 
more probable that he (or the movement associated with his name) 
came from Crete. It is certain that Orphic doctrines contain 
much that seems to have its first source in Egypt, and it was 
chiefly through Crete that Egypt influenced Greece. Orpheus is 
said to have been a reformer who was torn to pieces by frenzied 
Maenads actuated by Bacchic orthodoxy. His addiction u> music 
is not so prominent in the older forms of the legend as it became 
later. Primarily he was a priest and a philosopher. 

Whatever may have been the teaching of Orpheus (if he existed), 
the teaching of the Orphics is well known. They believed in the 
transmigration of souls; they taught that the soul hereafter 
might achieve eternal bliss or suffer eternal or temporary torment 
according to its way of life here on earth. They aimed at becoming 
"pure," partly by ceremonies of purification, partly by avoiding 
certain kinds of contamination. The most orthodox among them 
abstained from animal food, except on ritual occasions when 
they ate it sacramentally. Man, they held, is partly of earth, 
partly of heaven; by a pure life the heavenly part is increased 
and the earthly part diminished. In the end a man may become 
one with Bacchus, and is called "a Bacchus." There was an 
elaborate theology, according to which Bacchus was twice born, 
once of his mother Semele, and once from the thigh of his father 
Zeus. 

There are many forms of the Dionysus myth. In one of them, 
Dionysus is the son of Zeus and Persephone; while still a boy, 
he is torn to pieces by Titans, who eat his flesh, all but the heart. 
Some say that the heart was given by Zeus to Semele, others 
that Zeus swallowed it ; in either case, it gave rise to the second 
birth of Dionysus. The tearing of a wild animal and the de- 
vouring of its raw flesh by Bacchae was supposed to re-enact 
the tearing and "eating of Dionysus by the Titans, and the animal, 
in some* sense, was an incarnation of the god. The Titans were 

35 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

earth-born, but after eating the god they had a spark of divinity. 
So man is partly of earth, partly divine, and Bacchic rites sought 
to make him more nearly completely divine. 

Euripides puts a confession into the mouth of an Orphic priest, 
which is instructive: 1 

Lord of Europa's Tyrian line, 

Zeus-born, who holdest at thy feet 
The hundred citadels of Crete, 

I seek to Thee from that dim shrine, 

Roofed by the Quick and Carven Beam, 
By Chalyb steel and wild bull's blood. 
In flawless joints of Cypress wood 

Made steadfast. There is one pure stream 

My days have run. The servant I, 
Initiate, of Idaean Jove; 2 
Where midnight Zapreus 3 roves, I rove; 

I have endured his thunder-cry ; 

Fulfilled his red and bleeding feasts ; 

Held the Great Mother's mountain flume, 
I am set free and named by name 

A Bacchos of the Mailed Priests. 

Robed in pure white I have borne me clean 
From man's vile birth and coffined clay, 
And exiled from my lip alway 

Touch of all meat where Life hath been. 

Orphic tablets have been found in tombs, giving instructions to 
the soul of the dead person as to how to find his way in the 
next world, and whal to say in order to prove himself worthy of 
salvation. They are broken and incomplete; the most nearly 
complete (the Petelia tablet) is as follows : 

Thou shah find on the left of the House of Hades a Well-spring, 
And by the side thereof standing a white cypress. 
To this well-spring approach not near. 

1 The verse translations in thtt chapter arc by Prufcttur Gilbert 
Murray. 

* Mystically identified with DionyHu*. 
1 One of the many name* of I )ionysm. 

36 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

But thou shalt find another by the Lake of Memory, 

Cold water flowing forth, and there are Guardians before it, 

Say: "I am a child of Earth and of Starry Heaven; 

But my race is of Heaven (alone). This ye know yourselves. 

And lo, I am parched with thirst and I perish. Give me quickly 

The cold water flowing forth from the Lake of Memory." 

And of themselves they will give thee to drink from the holy 

well-spring, 
And thereafter among the other heroes thou shalt have lordship. . . . 

Another tablet says: "Hail, Thou who hast suffered the suffer- 
ing . . . Thou art become (Sod from Man." And yet in another: 
"Happy and Blessed One, thou shalt be God instead of mortal/' 

The well-spring of which the soul is not to drink is Lethe, which 
brings forgetfulness; the other well-spring is Mnemosyne, re- 
membrance. The soul in the next world, if it is to achieve salva- 
tion, is not to forget, but, on the contrary, to acquire a memory 
surpassing what is natural. 

The Orphics were an ascetic sect; wine, to them, was only a 
symbol, as, later, in the Christian sacrament. The intoxication that 
they sought was that of "enthusiasm," of union with the god. They 
bt-lieved themselves, in this way, to acquire mystic knowledge not 
obtainable by ordinary means. This mystical element entered into 
Greek philosophy with Pythagoras, who was a reformer of Orphism 
as Orpheus was a reformer of the religion of Dionysus. From 
Pythagoras Orphic elements entered into the philosophy of Plato, 
and from Plato into most later philosophy that was in any degree 
religious. 

Certain definitely Bacchic elements survived wherever Orphism 
had influence. One of these was ferrriism, of which there was 
much in Pythagoras, and which, in Plato, went so far as to claim 
complete political equality for women. "Women as a sex," says 
Pythagoras, "are more naturally akin to piety." Another Bacchic 
element was respect for violent emotion. Greek tragedy grew out 
of the rites of Dionysus. Euripides, especially, honoured the two 
chief gods of Orphism, Dionysus and Eros. He has no respect for 
the coldly self-righteous well-behaved man, who, in his tragedies, 
is apt to be driven mad or otherwise brought to grief by the gods 
in resentment of his blasphemy. 

The conventional tradition concerning the Greeks is that they 
exhibited an admirable serenity, which enabled them to contem- 

37 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

plate passion from without, perceiving whatever beauty it exhibited 
but themselves calm and Olympian. This is a very one-sided view. 
It is true, perhaps, of Homer, Sophocles, and Aristotle, but it is 
emphatically not true of those Greeks who were touched, directly 
or indirectly, by Bacchic or Orphic influences. At Eleusis, where 
the Eleusinian mysteries formed the most sacred part of Athenian 
State religion, a hymn was sung, saying: 

With Thy wine-cup waving high, 
With Thy maddening revelry, 
To Eleusis' flowery vale, 
Comest Thou Bacchus, Paean, hail! 

In the Bacchae of Euripides, the chorus of Maenads displays a 
combination of poetry and savagery which is the very reverse of 
serene. They celebrate the delight in tearing a wild animal limb 
from limb, and eating it raw then and there: 

O glad, glad on the Mountains 
To swoon in the race outworn. 
When the holy fawn-skin clings 

And all else sweeps away, 
To the joy of the quick red fountains, 
The blood of the hill-goat torn, 
The glory of wild-beast ravenin^s 

Where the hill-top catches the day, 
To the Phrygian, Lydian mountains 
*Tis Hromios leads the way. 

(Bromtos was another of the many names of Dionysus.) The dance 
of the Maenads on the mountain side was not only fierce; it was 
an escape from the burdens and cares of civilization into the world 
of non-human beauty and the freedom of wind and stars. In a les< 
frenzied mood they sing: 

Will they ever come to me, ever a^ain, 

The long, long dances, 
On through the dark till the dim stars wane ? 
Shall I feel the dew on my throat, and the stream 
Of wind in my hair? Shall our white feet j^lcam 

In the dim expanses? 
O feet of the fawn to the greenwood fled, 

Alone in the grass and the loveliness ; 
I^eap of the hunted, no more in dread, 

Beyond the snares and the deadly press. 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

Yet a voice still in the distance sounds, 
A voice and a fear and a haste of hounds, 
O wildly labouring, fiercely fleet, 

Onward yet by river and glen 
Is it joy or terror, ye storm-swift feet ? 

To the dear lone lands untroubled of men, 
Where no voice sounds, and amid the shadowy green 
The little things of the woodland live unseen. 

Before repeating that the Greeks were "serene," try to imagine 
the matrons of Philadelphia behaving in this manner, even in a 
play by Eugene O'Neill. 

The Orphic is no more "serene" than the unreformed wor- 
shipper of Dionysus. To the Orphic, life in this world is pain and 
weariness. We are bound to a wheel which turns through endless 
cycles of birth and death; our true life is the stars, but we are 
tied to earth. Only by purification and renunciation and an ascetic 
life can we escape from the wheel and attain at last to the ecstasy 
of union with God. This is not the view of men to whom life is 
easy and pleasant. It is more like the Negro spiritual: 



I'm tfoing to tell God all of my troubles 
When I get home. 

Not all of the Greeks, but a large proportion of them, were 
passionate, unhappy, at war with themselves, driven along one 
road by the intellect and along another by the passions, with the 
imagination to conceive heaven and the wilful self-assertion that 
creates hell. They had a maxim "nothing too much," but they 
were in fact excessive in everything in pure thought, in poetry, 
in religion, and in sin. It was the combination of passion and 
intellect that made them great, while they were great. Neither 
alone would have transformed the world for all future time as 
they transformed it. Their prototype in mythology is not 
Olympian Zeus, but Prometheus, who brought fire from heaven 
and was rewarded with eternal torment. 

If taken as characterizing the Greeks as a whole, however, what 
has just been said would be as one-sided as the view that the 
Greeks were characterized by "serenity." There were, in fact, two 
tendencies in Greece, one passionate, religious, mystical, other- 
worldly, the other cheerful, empirical, rationalistic, and interested 
in acquiring knowledge of a diversity of facts. Herodotus represents 

39 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHTCAL THOUGHT 

still used the Babylonian cuneiform; but Hiram of Tyre (969- 
936) used the Phoenician alphabet, which probably developed out 
of the Egyptian script. The Egyptians used, at first, a pure picture 
writing; gradually the pictures, much conventionalized, came to 
represent syllables (the first syllables of the names of the things 
pictured), and at last single letters, on the principle of "A was 
an Archer who shot at a frog." 1 This last step, which was not 
taken with any completeness by the Egyptians themselves, but 
by the Phoenicians, gave the alphabet with all its advantages. 
The Greeks, borrowing from the Phoenicians, altered the alphabet 
to suit their language, and made the important innovation of 
adding vowels instead of having only consonants. There can be 
no doubt that the acquisition of this convenient method of 
writing greatly hastened the rise of Greek civilization. 

The first notable product of the Hellenic civilization was 
Homer. Everything about Homer is conjectural, but there is a 
widely held opinion that he was a series of poets rather than an 
individual. According to those who hold this opinion, the Iliad 
and the Odyssey between them took about two hundred years 
to complete, some say from 750 to 550 B.C., 2 while others hold 
that "Homer 11 was nearly complete at the end of the eighth 
century. 3 The Homeric poems, in their present form, were 
brought to Athens by Peisistratus, who reigned (with inter- 
missions) from 560 to 527 B.C. From his time onward, the Athe- 
- nian youth learnt Homer by heart, and this was the most important 
part of their education. In some parts of Greece, notably in Sparta, 
Homer had not the same prestige until a later date. 

The Homeric poems, like the courtly romances of the later 
Middle Ages, represent the point of view of a civilized aristocracy, 
which ignores as plebeian various superstitions that arc still 
rampant among the populace. In much later times, many of these 
superstitions rose again to the light of day. Guided by anthropology, 
many modern writers have come to the conclusion that Homer, 
so far from being primitive, was an cxpurgator, a kind of eighteenth 
century rationalizer of ancient myths, holding up an upper-class 

1 For instance, "Gimel," the third letter of the Hebrew alphabet, 
means "camel/* and the sign for it is a conventionalized picture of a 
camel. 

1 Oeloch, Grieclwcht Gttchichte, chap. xti. 

* Rostovtseff, Hittury of tht Ancient World, Vol. I, p. 399. 

28 



THF RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

ideal of urbane enlightenment. The Olympian gods, who represent 
religion in I tamer, were not the only objects of worship among the 
Greeks, either in his time or later. There were other darker and 
more savage elements in popular religion, which were kept at 
bay by the Greek intellect at its best, but lay in wait to pounce 
in moments of weakness or terror. In the time of decadence, 
beliefs which Homer had discarded proved to have persisted, 
half buried, throughout the classical period. This fact explains 
many things that would otherwise seem inconsistent and sur- 
prising. 

Primitive religion, everywhere, was tribal rather than personal. 
Certain rites were performed, which were intended, by sympa- 
thetic magic, to further the interests of the tribe, especially in 
respect of fertility, vegetable, animal, and human. The winter 
solstice was a time when the sun had to be encouraged not to 
go on diminishing in strength; spring and harvest also called 
for appropriate ceremonies. These were often such as to generate 
a great collective excitement, in which individuals lost their 
sense of separateness and felt themselves at one with the whole 
tribe. All over the world, at a certain stage of religious evolution, 
sacred animals and human beings were ceremonially killed and 
eaten. In different regions, this stage occurred at very different 
dates. Human sacrifice usually lasted longer than the sacrificial 
eating of human victims; in Greece it was not yet extinct at the 
beginning of historical times. Fertility rites without such cruel 
aspects \\ere common throughout Greece; the Eleusinian mys- 
teries, in particular, were essentially agricultural in their symbolism. 

It must be admitted that religion, in Homer, is not very religious. 
The gods are completely human, differing from men only in 
being immortal and possessed of superhuman powers. Morally, 
there is nothing to be said for them, and it is difficult to see how 
they can have inspired much awe. In some passages, supposed 
to be late, they are treated with Voltairean irreverence. Such 
genuine religious feeling as is to be found in Homer is less con- 
cerned with the gods of Olympus than with more shadow)' 
beings such as Fate or Necessity or Destiny, to whom even Zeus 
is subject. Fate exercised a great influence on all Greek thought, 
and perhaps was one of the sources from which science derived 
the belief in nUtural law. 

The Homeric gods were the gods of a conquering aristocracy, 

29 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

not the useful fertility gods of those who actually tilled the soil. 
As Gilbert Murray says: 1 

"The gods of most nations claim to have created the world. 
The Olympians make no such claim. The most they ever did was 
to conquer it. ... And when they have conquered their kingdoms, 
what do they do? Do they attend to the government? Do they 
promote agriculture? Do they practise trades and industries? 
Not a bit of it. Why should they do any honest work? They 
find it easier to live on the revenues and blast with thunderbolts 
the people who do not pay. They are conquering chieftains, 
royal buccaneers. They fight, and feast, and play, and make 
music; they drink deep, and roar with laughter at the lame smith 
who waits on them. They are never afraid, except of their own 
king. They never tell lies, except in love and war." 

Homer's human heroes, equally, are not very well behaved. 
The leading family is the House of Pelops, but it did not succeed 
in setting a pattern of happy family life. 

"Tantalos, the Asiatic founder of the dynasty, began its career 
by a direct offence against the gods; some said, by trying to 
cheat them into eating human flesh, that of his own son Pelops. 
Pelops, having been miraculously restored to life, offended in 
his turn. He won his famous chariot-race against Oinomao*, 
kinp of Pisa, by the connivance of the latter 's charioteer, Myrtilos. 
and then got rid of his confederate, whom he had promised to 
reward, by flinging him into the .sea. The curse descended to 
his sons, Atreus and Thyestes, in the form of what the Greeks 
called ate, a strong if not actually irresistible impulse to crime. 
Thyestes corrupted his brother's wife and thereby managed 
to steal the 'luck* of the family, the famous golden-fleeced ram. 
Atreus in turn secured his brother's banishment, and recalling 
him under pretext of a reconciliation, feasted him on the flesh 
of his own children. The curse was now inherited by Atreus' 
son Agamemnon, who offended Artemis by killing a sacred stag, 
sacrificed his own daughter Iphigcnia to appease the goddess 
and obtain a safe passage to Troy for his fleet, and was in turn 
murdered by his faithless wife Klytairnnestra and her paramour 
Aigisthos, a surviving son of Thyestes. Orestes, Agamemnon's son, 
in turn avenped his father by killing his mother and Aigistlios."* 

1 Fn c Stages of Greek Rtligitm t p. 67. 

* Primitive Culture in Greece, II. J. Rose, 1925, p. 

3 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

Homer as a finished achievement was a product of Ionia, i.e. of 
a part of Hellenic Asia Minor and the adjacent islands. Some time 
during the sixth century at latest, the Homeric poems became 
fixed in their present form. It was also during this century that 
Greek science and philosophy and mathematics began. At the 
same time events of fundamental importance were happening 
in other parts of the world. Confucius, Buddha, and Zoroaster, 
if they existed, probably belong to the same century. 1 In the 
middle of the century the Persian Empire was established by 
Cyrus ; towards its close the Greek cities of Ionia, to which the 
Persians had allowed a limited autonomy, made a fruitless rebel- 
lion, which was put down by Darius, and their best men became 
exiles. Several of the philosophers of this period were refugees, 
who wandered from city to city in the still unenslaved parts of 
the Hellenic world, spreading the civilization that, until then, 
had been mainly contincd to Ionia. They were kindly treated 
in their wanderings. Xenophanes, who flourished in the later 
part of the sixth century, and who was one of the refugees, says: 
"This is the sort of thing we should say by the fireside in the 
winter-time, as we lie on soft couches, after a good meal, drinking 
sweet wine and crunching chickpeas: 'Of what country are you, 
and how old are you, good Sir? And how old were you when the 
Mede appeared? 1 " The re*t of Greece succeeded in preserving 
its independence at the battles of Salamis and Plataea, after 
which Ionia was liberated for a time. 1 

Greece was divided into a large number of small independent 
states, each consisting of a city with some agricultural territory 
surrounding it. The level of civilization was very different in 
different parts of the Greek world, and only a minority of cities 
contributed to the total of Hellenic achievement. Sparta, of which 
1 shall have much to say later, was important in a military sense, 
but not culturally. Corinth was rich and prosperous, a great 
commercial centre, but not prolific in great men. 

Then there were purely agricultural rural communities, such 

1 Zoroaster's date, however, is very conjectural. Seine place it as early 
at> 1000 B.C. Sec Cambridge Anritnt History, Vol. IV, p, 207. 

1 As a result of the defeat of Athens by Sparta, the Persians regained 
the whole coast of Asia Minor, to which their right was acknowledged in 
the Peace of Antukidas (387-6 ii.c.). About fifty years later, they were 
incorporated in Alexander's empire. 

3' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as the proverbial Arcadia, which townsmen imagined to be 
idyllic, but which really was full of ancient barbaric horrors. 

The inhabitants worshipped Hermes and Pan, and had a 
multitude of fertility cults, in which, often, a mere square pillar 
did duty in place of a statue of the god. The goat was the symbol 
of fertility, because the peasants were too poor to possess bulls. 
When food was scarce, the statue of Pan was beaten. (Similar 
things are still done in remote Chinese villages.) There was a clan 
of supposed were-wolves, associated, probably, with human 
sacrifice and cannibalism. It was thought that whoever tasted the 
flesh of a sacrificed human victim became a were-wolf. There 
was a cave sacred to Zeus Lykaios (the wolf- Zeus); in this cave 
no one had a shadow, and whoever entered it died within a year. 
All this superstition was still flourishing in classical times. 1 

Pan, whose original name (some say) was "Paon", meaning the 
feeder or shepherd, acquired his better-known title, interpreted 
as meaning the All-God, when his worship was adopted by 
Athens in the fifth century, after the Persian war. 2 

There was, however, in ancient Greece, much that we can feel 
to have been religion as we understand the term. This was con- 
nected, not with the Olympians, but with Dionysus, or Bacchus, 
whom we think of most naturally as the somewhat disreputable- 
god of wine and drunkenness. The way in which, out of his 
worship, there arose a profound mysticism, which greatly influ- 
enced many of the philosophers, and even had a part in shaping 
Christian theology, is very remarkable, and must be understood 
by anyone who wishes to study the development of Greek 
thought. 

Dionysus, or Bacchus, was originally a Thracian god. The 
Thracians were very much less civilized than the G reeks, who 
regarded them as barbarians. Like all primitive agriculturists, 
they had fertility cults, and a god who promoted fertility. His 
name was Bacchus. It was never quite clear whether Bacchus 
had the shape of a man or of a bull. When they discovered how 
to make beer, they thought intoxication divine, and gave honour 
to Bacchus. When, later, they came to know the vine and to learn 
to drink wine, they thought even better of him* His functions in 
promoting fertility in general became somewhat subordinate 

1 Rose, Primitive Greece, p. 65 II. 

1 J. . Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Helicon* p. 651 

3* 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

to his functions in relation to the grape and the divine madness 
produced by wine. 

At what date his worship migrated from Thrace to Greece is 
not known, but it seems to have been just before the beginning 
of historical times. The cult of Bacchus was met with hostility 
by the orthodox, but nevertheless it established itself. It con- 
tained many barbaric elements, such as tearing wild animals 
to pieces and eating the whole of them raw. It had a curious 
clement of feminism. Respectable matrons and maids, in large 
companies, would spend whole nights on the bare hills in dances 
which stimulated ecstasy, and in an intoxication perhaps partly 
alcoholic, but mainly mystical. Husbands found the practice an- 
noying, but did not dare to oppose religion. Both the beauty and 
the savagery of the cult are set forth in the Bacchae of Euripides. 

The success of Dionysus in Greece is not surprising. Like all 
communities that have been civilized quickly, the Greeks, or at 
least a certain proportion of them, developed a love of the primi- 
tive, and a hankering after a more instinctive and passionate 
way of life than that sanctioned by current morals. To the man 
or woman who, by compulsion, is more civilized in behaviour 
than in feeling, rationality is irksome and virtue is felt as a burden 
and a slavery. This leads to a reaction in thought, in feeling, and 
in conduct. Jt is the reaction in thought that will specially concern 
us, but something must first be said about the reaction in feeling 
and conduct. 

The civilized man is distinguished from the savage mainly by 
prudence, or, to use a slightly wider term, forethought. He is 
willing to endure present pains for the sake of future pleasures, 
even if the future pleasures are rather distant. This habit began to 
be important with the rise of agriculture; no animal and no 
savage would work in the spring in order to have food next 
winter, except for a few purely instinctive forms of action, such 
as bees making honey or squirrels burying nuts. In these cases, 
there is no forethought; there is a direct impulse to an act which, 
to the human spectator, is obviously going to prove useful later 
on. True forethought only arises when a man does something 
towards which no impulse urges him, because his reason tells 
him that he will profit by it at some future date. Hunting requires 
no forethought* because it is pleasurable ; but tilling the soil is 
labour,4md cannot be done from spontaneous impulse. 

uj H'Mfcm /*****? 33 B 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Civilization checks impulse not only through forethought, 
which is a self-administered check, but also through law, custom , 
and religion. This check it inherits from barbarism, but it makes 
it less instinctive and more systematic. Certain acts arc labelled 
criminal, and are punished ; certain others, though not punished 
by law, are labelled wicked, and expose those who arc guilty of 
them to social disapproval. The institution of private property 
brings with it the subjection of women, and usually the creation 
of a slave class. On the one hand the purposes of the community 
are enforced upon the individual, and, on the other hand the 
individual, having acquired the habit of viewing his life as a 
whole, increasingly sacrifices his present to his future. 

It is evident that this process can be carried too far, as it is, for 
instance, by the miser. But without going to such extremes 
prudence may easily involve the loss of some of the best things 
in life. The worshipper of Dionysus reacts against prudence. In 
intoxication, physical or spiritual, he recovers an intensity of 
feeling which prudence had destroyed; he finds the world full 
of delight and beauty, and his imagination is suddenly liberated 
from the prison of every-day preoccupations. The Bacchic 
ritual produced what was called "enthusiasm," which means, 
etymologically, having the god enter into the worshipper, who 
believed that he became one with the god. Much of what is 
greatest in human achievement involves some element of intoxi- 
cation, 1 some sweeping away of prudence by passion. Without 
the Bacchic element, life would be uninteresting; with it, it is 
dangerous. Prudence versus passion is a conflict that runs through 
history. It is not a conflict in which we ought to side wholly 
with either party. 

In the sphere of thought, sober civilization is roughly synony- 
mous with science. But science, unadulterated, is not satisfying; 
men need also passion and art and religion. Science may set 
limits to knowledge, but should not set limits to imagination. 
Among Greek philosophers, as among those of bter times, there 
were those who were primarily scientific and those who were 
primarily religious; the latter owed much, directly or indirectly, 
to the religion of Bacchus. This applies especially to Plato, and 
through him to those later developments which were ultimately 
embodied in Christian theology. 

1 I mean mental intoxication, not intoxication by alcohol. 

34 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

The worship of Dionysus in its original form was savage, and 
in many ways repulsive. It was not in this form that it influenced 
the philosophers, but in the spiritualized form attributed to 
Orpheus, which was ascetic, and substituted mental for physical 
intoxication. 

Orpheus is a dim but interesting figure. Some hold that he was 
an actual man, others that he was a god or an imaginary hero. 
Traditionally, he came from Thrace, like Bacchus, but it seems 
more probable that he (or the movement associated with his name) 
came from Crete. It is certain that Orphic doctrines contain 
much that seems to have its first source in Egypt, and it was 
chiefly through Crete that Egypt influenced Greece. Orpheus is 
said to have l>een a reformer who was torn to pieces by frenzied 
Maenads actuated by Bacchic orthodoxy. His addiction to music 
is not so prominent in the older forms of the legend as it became 
later. Primarily he was a priest and a philosopher. 

Whatever may have been the teaching of Orpheus (if he existed), 
the teaching of the Orphics is well known. They believed in the 
transmigration of souls; they taught that the soul hereafter 
might achieve eternal bliss or suffer eternal or temporary torment 
according to its way of life here on earth. They aimed at becoming 
"pure," partly by ceremonies of purification, partly by avoiding 
certain kinds of contamination. The most orthodox among them 
abstained from animal food, except on ritual occasions when 
they ate it sacramentally. Man, they held, is partly of earth, 
partly of heaven; by a pure life the heavenly part is increased 
and the earthly part diminished. In the end a man may become 
one with Bacchus, and is called **a Bacchus." There was an 
elaborate theology, according to which Bacchus was twice born, 
once of his mother Semele, and once from the thigh of his father 
Zeus. 

There are many forms of the Dionysus myth. In one of them, 
Dionysus is the son of Zeus and Persephone; while still a boy, 
he is torn to pieces by Titans, who eat his flesh, all but the heart. 
Some say that the heart was given by Zeus to Semele, others 
that Zeus swallowed it; in either case, it gave rise to the second 
birth of Dionysus. The tearing of a wild animal and the de- 
vouring of its raw flesh by Bacchae was supposed to re-enact 
the tearing and eating of Dionysus by the Titans, and the animal, 
in some* sense, was an incarnation of the god. The Titans were 

35 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

earth-born, but after eating the god they had a spark of divinity. 
So man is partly of earth, partly divine, and Bacchic rites sought 
to make him more nearly completely divine. 

Euripides puts a confession into the mouth of an Orphic priest, 
which is instructive: 1 

Lord of Europa's Tynan line, 

Zeus-born, who boldest at thy feet 
The hundred citadels of Crete, 

I seek to Thee from that dim shrine, 

Roofed by the Quick and Can-en Beam, 
By Chalyb steel and wild bull's blood. 
In flawless joints of Cypress wood 

Made steadfast. There is one pun- stream 

My days have run. The sen ant I, 
Initiate, of Idaean Jove; 2 
Where midnight Zagrcus 8 rove?, 1 rove; 

I have endured his thunder-cry ; 

Fulfilled his red and bleeding feasts ; 

Held the Great Mother's mountain flame, 
I am set free and named by name 

A Bacchos of the Mailed Priests. 

Robed in pure white I have borne me clean 
From man's vile birth and coihned clay, 
And exiled from my lip ahvay 

Touch of all meat where Life hath been. 

Orphic tablets have been found in tombs, giving instructions to 
the soul of the dead person as to how to find his way in the 
next world, and what to say in order to prove himself \\orthy of 
salvation. They are broken and incomplete; the most nearly 
complete (the Petelia tablet) is as follows: 

Thou shalt find on the left of the House of Hades a Well-spring, 
And by the side thereof standing a white cypress. 
To this well-spring approach not near. 

1 The verse translations in thii chapter are by Profc-wor Gilbert 
Murray. 

1 Mystically idmtifad with Dionysu*, 
* One of thr many narn* * of I )ionysu*. 

in 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

But thou shalt find another by the Lake of Memory, 

Cold water flowing forth, and there are Guardians before it, 

Say: "I am a child of Earth and of Starry Heaven; 

Hut my race is of Heaven (alone). This ye know yourselves. 

And lo, I am parched with thirst and I perish. Give me quickly 

The cold water flowing forth from the Lake of Memory." 

And of themselves they will give thee to drink from the holy 

well-spring, 
And thereafter among the other heroes thou shalt have lordship. . . . 

Another tablet says: "Hail, Thou who hast suffered the suffer- 
ing . . . Thou art become (Jod from Man." And yet in another: 
"Happy and Blessed One, thou shalt be God instead of mortal." 

The well-spring of which the soul is not to drink is Ix?the, which 
brings forgetfulness; the other well-spring is Mnemosyne, re- 
membrance. The soul in the next world, if it is to achieve salva- 
tion, is not to forget, but, on the contrary, to acquire a memory 
surpassing what is natural. 

The Orphics were an ascetic sect; wine, to them, was only a 
symbol, as, later, in the Christian sacrament. The intoxication that 
they sought was that of "enthusiasm," of union with the god. They 
believed themselves, in this way, to acquire mystic knowledge not 
obtainable by ordinary means. This mystical element entered into 
( Jreek philosophy with Pythagoras, who was a reformer of Orphism 
as Orpheus was a reformer of the religion of Dionysus. From 
Pythagoras Orphic elements entered into the philosophy of Plato, 
and from Plato into most later philosophy that was in any degree 
religious. 

Certain definitely Bacchic elements survived wherever Orphism 
had influence. One of these was frrrriism, of which there was 
much in Pythagoras, and which, in Plato, went so far as to claim 
complete political equality for women. "Women as a sex," says 
Pythagoras, "are more naturally akin to piety." Another Bacchic 
element was respect for violent emotion. Greek tragedy grew out 
of the rites of Dionysus. Euripides, especially, honoured the two 
chief gods of Orphism, Dionysus and Kros. He has no respect for 
the coldly self-righteous well-behaved man, who, in his tragedies, 
is apt to be driven mad or otherwise brought to grief by the gods 
in resentment of his blasphemy. 

'I 'he conventional tradition concerning the Greeks is that they 
exhibited an admirable serenity, which enabled them to contcm- 

37 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

plate passion from without, perceiving whatever beauty it exhibited 
but themselves calm and Olympian. This is a very one-sided view. 
It is true, perhaps, of Homer, Sophocles, and Aristotle, but it is 
emphatically not true of those Greeks who were touched, directly 
or indirectly, by Bacchic or Orphic influences. At Klcusis, where 
the Eleusinian mysteries formed the most sacred part of Athenian 
State religion, a hymn was sung, saying: 

With Thy wine-cup waving high, 
With Thy maddening revelry, 
To Klcusis' flower}' vale, 
Comest Thou Bacchus, Paean, hail! 

In the Bacchae of Euripides, the chorus of Maenads displays a 
combination of poetry and savagery which is the very reverse of 
serene. They celebrate the delight in tearing a wild anirnal limb 
from limb, and eating it raw then and there: 

O glad, glad on the Mountains 
To swoon in the race outworn, 
When the holy fawn-skin clings 

And all else sweeps away, 
To the joy of the quick red fountains, 
The blood of the hill-goat torn, 
The glory of wild-beast ravening* 

Where the hill-top catches the day, 
To the Phrygian, Lydian mountains 
'Tis ISromios leads the way. 

(Bromios was another of the many names of Dionysus.) The dance 
of the Maenads on the mountain side was not only fierce; it was 
an escape from the burdens and cares of civilization into the world 
of non-human beauty and the freedom of wind and stars. In a less 
frenzied mood they sing: 

Will they ever come to me, ever again, 

The long, long dances, 
On through the dark till the dim stars wane ? 
Shall I feel the dew on my throat, and the stream 
Of wind in my hair ? Shall our white feet gleam 

In the dim expanses? 
O feet of the fawn to the greenwood fled, 

Alone in the grass and the loveliness ; 
[>eap of the hunted, no more in dread, 

Beyond the snares and the deadly press. 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

Yet a voice still in the distance sounds, 
A voice and a fear and a haste of hounds, 
O wildly labouring, fiercely fleet, 

Onward yet by river and glen 
Is it joy or terror, ye storm-swift/eel? 

To the dear lone lands untroubled of men, 
Where no voice sounds, and amidfthe shadowy green 
The little things of the woodland (live unseen. 

Before repeating that the Greeks were "serene," try to imagine 
the matrons of Philadelphia behaving in ti<js manner, even in a 
play by Eugene O'Neill. 

The Orphic is no more "serene" than tl unrefr ied woift 
shipper of Dionysus. To the Orphic, life in th* world is pain and 
weariness. We are bound to a J -heel which t^rns through endless 
cycles of birth and death; our true life is tfhe stars, but we are 
tied to earth. Only by purification and renunciation and an ascetic 
life can we escape from the wheel and attain at last to the ecstasy 
of union with God. This is not the view of men to whom life is 
easy and pleasant. It is more like the Negro spiritual: 

I'm going to tell God all of my troubles 
When I get home. 

Not all of the Greeks, hut a large proportion of them, were 
passionate, unhappy, at war with themselves, driven along one 
road by the intellect and along another by the passions, with the 
imagination to conceive heaven and the wilful self-assertion that 
creates hell. They had a maxim "nothing too much," but they 
were in fact excessive in everything in pure thought, in poetry, 
in religion, and in sin. It was the combination of passion and 
intellect that made them great, while they were great. Neither 
alone would have transformed the world for all future time as 
they transformed it. Their prototype in mythology is not 
Olympian Zeus, but Prometheus, who brought fire from heaven 
and was rewarded with eternal torment. 

If taken as characterizing the Greeks as a whole, however, what 
has just been said would be as one-sided as the view that the 
Greeks were characterized by "serenity." There were, in fact, two 
tendencies in Greece, one passionate, religious, mystical, other- 
worldly, the other cheerful, empirical, rationalistic, and interested 
in acquiring knowledge of a diversity of facts. Herodotus represents 

39 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

this latter tendency; so do the earliest Ionian philosophers; so, 
up to a point, does Aristotle. Beloch (op. cit. f I, i, p. 434), after 
describing Orphism, says: 

"But the Greek nation was too full of youthful vigour for the 
general acceptance of a belief which denies this world and transfers 
real life to the Beyond. Accordingly the Orphic doctrine remained 
confined to the relatively narrow circle of the initiate, without 
acquiring the smallest influence on the State religion, not even in 
communities which, like Athens, had taken up the celebration of 
the mysteries into the State ritual and placed it under legal pro- 
tection. A full millennium was to pass before these ideas in a 
quite different theological dress, it is true achieved victory in 
the Greek world/ 1 

It would seem that this is an overstatement, particularly as 
regards the Eleusinian mysteries, which were impregnated with 
Orphism. Broadly speaking, those who were of a religious tem- 
perament turned to Orphism, while rationalists despised it. One 
might compare its status to that of Methodism in England in the 
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. 

We know more or less what an educated Greek learnt from his 
father, but we know very little of what, in his earliest years, he 
learnt from his mother, who was, to a great extent, shut out from 
the civilization in which the men took delight. It seems probable 
that educated Athenians, even in the best period, however 
rationalistic they may have been in their explicitly conscious 
mental processes, retained from tradition and from childhood a 
more primitive way of thinking and feeling, which was always 
liable to prove victorious in times of stress. For this reason, no 
simple analysis of the Greek outlook is likely to be adequate. 

The influence of religion, more particularly of non-Olympian 
religion, on Greek thought was not adequately recognized until 
recent times. A revolutionary book, Jane Harrison's Prolegomena 
to the Study of Greek Religion, emphasized both the primitive and 
the Dionysiac elements in the religion of ordinary Greeks; F. M. 
Cornford's From Religion to Philosophy tried to make students of 
Greek philosophy aware of the influence of religion on the philo- 
sophers, but cannot be wholly accepted as trustworthy in many 
of its interpretations, or, for that matter, in its anthropology. 1 The 

1 On the other hand Cornford's books on various Platonic dialogues 
seem to me wholly admirable. 



THE RISE OF GREEK CIVILIZATION 

most balanced statement known to me is in John Burnet's Early 
Greek Philosophy, especially chapter ii, "Science and Religion." A 
conflict between science and religion arose, he says, out of "the 
religious revival which swept over Hellas in the sixth century B.C.," 
together with the shifting of the scene from Ionia to the West. 
"The religion of continental Hellas," he ssi^s, "had developed in 
a very different way from that of Ionia. In particular, the worship 
of Dionysus, which came from Thrace, and is barely mentioned 
in Homer, contained in germ a wholly new way of looking at man's 
relation to the world. It would certainly b& wrong to credit the 
Thracians themselves with any very exalted wews; but there can 
be no doubt that, to the Greeks, the phenomenon of ecstasy 
suggested that the soul was something more than a feeble double 
of the self, and that it was only when 'out of the body* that it 
could show its true nature. . . . 

44 It looked as if Greek religion were about to enter on the same 
stage as that already reached by the religions of the East; and, but 
for the rise of science, it is hard to see what could have checked 
this tendency. It is usual to say that the Greeks were saved from 
a religion of the Oriental type by their having no priesthood; but 
this is to mistake the effect for the cause. Priesthoods do not make 
dogmas, though they preserve them once they are made; and in 
the earlier stages of their development, the Oriental peoples had 
no priesthoods either in the sense intended. It was not so much 
the absence of a priesthood as the existence of the scientific 
schools that saved Greece. 

"The new religion for in one sense it was new, though in 
another as old as mankind reached its highest point of develop- 
ment with the foundation of the Orphic communities. So far as 
\ve can see, the original home of these was Attica; but they spread 
with extraordinary rapidity, especially in Southern Italy and Sicily. 
They were first of dl associations for the worship of Dionysus; 
but they were distinguished by two features which were new 
among the Hellenes. They looked to a revelation as the source 
of religious authority, and they were organized as artificial com- 
munities. The poems which contained their theology were 
ascribed to the Thracian Orpheus, who had himself descended 
into Hades, and was therefore a safe guide through the perils 
which beset the disembodied soul in the next world." 

Hurried goes on to state that there is a striking similarity between 

4* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Orphic beliefs and those prevalent in India at about the same time, 
though he holds that there cannot have been any contact. He then 
comes on to the original meaning of the word "orgy," which was 
Mc*vUV *.tiA O*"hics to mean "sacrament," and was intended to 
general acceptance o* S oul and enable it to escape from the wheel 
reallifetotheBeyond.es, unlike the priests of Olympian cults, 
confined to the relatmcall "churches/ 1 i.e. religious communities 
acquiring the smallest ithout distinction of race or sex, could be 
communities which, liH f and from their influence arose the con- 
the mysteries into th^ as a way of life. 
" - A full millc 
*+ ther 



Chapter II 
THE MILESIAN SCHOOL 

IN every history of philosophy for studenftf, the first thing men- 
tioned is that philosophy began witWi hales, who said that 
everything is made of water. Thi$ is discouraging to the 
beginner, who is struggling perhaps not very hard to feel that 
respect for philosophy which the curriculum seems to expect. 
There is, however, ample reason to feel respkct for Thales, though 
perhaps rather as a man of science than as 11 nhiloson' sitfrfws?* 
modern sense of the word. 

Thales was a native of Miletus, in Asia Minor, a flourishing 
commercial city, in which there was a large slave population, and 
a bitter class struggle between the rich and poor among the free 
population. "At Miletus the people were at first victorious and 
murdered the wives and children of the aristocrats; then the 
aristocrats prevailed and burned their opponents alive, lighting 
up the open spaces of the city with live torches/' 1 Similar con- 
ditions prevailed in most of the Greek cities of Asia Minor at the 
time of Thales. 

Miletus, like other commercial cities of Ionia, underwent im- 
portant economic and political developments during the seventh 
and sixth centuries. At first, political power belonged to a land- 
owning aristocracy, but this was gradually replaced by a pluto- 
cracy of merchants. They, in turn, were replaced by a tyrant, 
who (as was usual) achieved power by the support of the demo- 
cratic party. The kingdom of Lydia lay to the east of the Greek 
coast towns, but remained on friendly terms with them until the 
fall of Nineveh (6oO B.C.). This left Lydia free to turn its attention 
to the West, but Miletus usually succeeded in preserving friendly 
relations, especially with Croesus, the last Lydian king, who was 
conquered by Cyrus in 546 B.C. There were also important rela- 
tions with Egypt, where the king depended upon Greek mer- 
cenaries, and had opened certain cities to Greek trade. The first 
Greek settlement in Egypt was a fort occupied by a Milesian 
garrison; but the most important, during the period 610-560 B.C., 
was Daphnac. Here Jeremiah and many other Jewish fugitives 
v, History of the Ancient World, Vol. I, p. 204. 

43 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

took refuge from Nebuchadrezzar (Jeremiah xliii. 5 If.); but while 
Egypt undoubtedly influenced the Greeks, the Jews did not, nor 
can we suppose that Jeremiah felt anything but horror towards 
the sceptical lonians. 

As regards the u2te of Thales, the best evidence, as we saw, is 
that he was famous for predicting an eclipse which, according to 
the astronomers, must have taken place in 585 B.C. Other evidence, 
such as it is, agrees in placing his activities at about this time. It 
is no proof of extraordinaiT genius on his part to have predicted 
an eclipse. Miletus wao allied with Lydia, and Lydia had cultural 
relations with Babylonia, and Babylonian astronomers had dis- 
covered tV't eclipses recur in a cycle of about nineteen years. 
They could predict eclipses of the moon with pretty complete 
success, but as regards solar eclipses they were hampered by the 
fact that an eclipse may be visible in one place and not in another. 
Consequently they could only know that at such and such a date 
it was worth while to look out for an eclipse, and this is probably 
all that Thales knew. Neither he nor they knew why there is 
this cycle. 

Thales is said to have travelled in Kgypt, and to have thence 
brought to the Greeks the science of geometry. What the Egyptians 
knew of geometry was mainly rules of thumb, and there is no 
reason to believe that Thales arrived at deductive proofs, such as 
later Greeks discovered. He seems to have discovered how to 
calculate the distance of a ship at sea from observations taken at 
two points on land, and how to estimate the height of a pyramid 
from the length of its shadow. Many other geometrical theorem* 
are attributed to him, but probably wrongly. 

He was one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, each of whom 
was specially noted for one wise saying; his, it is a niiM.tke to 
suppose, was "water is best." 

According to Aristotle, he thought that water is the original 
substance, out of which all others are funned ; and he maintained 
that the earth rests on water. Aristotle also says of him that he 
said the magnet has a soul in it, because it moves the iron ; further, 
that all things arc full of gods. 1 

The statement that everything is made of water is to be regarded 
as a scientific hypothesis, arid by no means a foolish one. Twenty 
years ago, the received view was that everything is made of 

1 Burnct (Early Gteck Philotophy, p. 51) questions tins last * tying. 

44 



THE MILESIAN SCHOOL 

hydrogen, which is two thirds of water. The Greeks were rash 
in their hypotheses, but the Milesian school, at least, was prepared 
to test them empirically. Too little is known of Thales to make it 
possible to reconstruct him at all satisfactorily, but of his successors 
in Miletus much more is known, and it is re^n5^C5nTRM2flfe%^ 
that something of their outlook came from Jround table, and that 
his philosophy were both crude, but they ifsoul, being air, holds 
both thought and observation. /$ass the whole world." 

There are many legends about him, 'ft 

known than the few facts I have mentidquity than Anaximander, 
are pleasant, for instance, the one told by like the opposite valua- 
(1259*): "lie was reproached for his poverty, ^Koras and Sjyjftji * 1 
to show that philosophy is of no use. According to fKe story, he 
knew by his skill in the stars while it was yet winter that there 
would be a great harvest of olives in the corning year; so, having 
a little money, he gave deposits for the use of all the olive-presses 
in Chios and Miletus, which he hired at a low price because no 
one bid against him. When the harvest time came, and many 
were wanted all at once and of a sudden, he let them out at any 
rate which he pleased, and made a quantity of money. Thus he 
showed the world that philosophers can easily be rich if they like, 
but that their ambition is of another sort." 

Anaximander, the second philosopher of the Milesian school, 
is much more interesting than Thales. His dates are uncertain, 
but he was said to have been sixty-four years old in 546 B.C., and 
there is reason to suppose that this is somewhere near the truth. 
He held that all things come from a single primal substance, but 
that it is not water, as Thales held, or any other of the substances 
that we know. It is infinite, eternal and ageless, and "it encom- 
passes all the worlds" for he thought our world only one of 
many. The primal substance is transformed into the various sub- 
stances witii which we are familiar, and these are transformed 
into each other. As to this, he makes an important and remarkable 
statement : 

"Into that from which things take their rise they pass away once 
more, as is ordained, for they make reparation and satisfaction to 
one another for their injustice according to the ordering of time." 

The idea of justice, both cosmic and human, played a part in 
(irerk religion Und philosophy which is not altogether easy for a 
modern to understand ; indeed our word "justice" hardly expresses 

45 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

what is meant, but it is difficult to find any other word that would 
be preferable. The thought which Anaximander is expressing 
seems to be this: there should be a certain proportion of fire, of 
earth, and of water in the world, but each element (conceived as a 
^AsVegardslhe <j ttcm P tin g to enlarge its empire. But there is 
that he was famous itP atu 1 ral h * wh f ich Perpetually redresses the 
the astronomers, must K* been fire, for example, there are ashes, 
such as it is, agrees in pl:? ce P tlon of justice-of not overstepping 
is no proof of extraordinaif. one of the most Profound of Greek 
an eclipse. Miletus wao " ub J ect to J ustlce J ust much as men 
relations with BabyJo* P ower was not itself personal, and was 

.. . a oUfr.i,.,, ec |j - 

Anaximander had an argument to prove that the primal sub- 
stance could not be water, or any other known element. If one of 
these were primal, it would conquer the others. Aristotle reports 
him as saying that these knovrn elements are in opposition to one 
another. Air is cold, water is moist, and fire is hot. "And therefore, 
if any one of them were infinite, the rest would have ceased to be 
by this time." The primal substance, therefore, must be neutral 
in this cosmic strife. 

There was an eternal motion, in the course of which was 
brought about the origin of die worlds. The worlds were not 
created, as in Jewish or Christian theology, but evolved. There 
was evolution also in the animal kingdom. Living creatures arose 
from the moist element as it was evaporated by the sun. Man, 
like every other animal, was descended from fishes. He must be 
derived from animals of a different sort, because, owing to his 
long infancy, he could not have survived, originally, as he is now. 

Anaximander was full of scientific curiosity. I !e is said to have 
been the first man who made a map. He held tliat the earth is 
shaped like a cylinder. He is variously reported as saying the sun 
is as large as the earth, or twenty-seven times as large, or twenty- 
eight times as large. 

Wherever he is original, he is scientific and rationalistic. 

Anaximenes, the last of the Milesian triad, is not quite so 
interesting as Anaximander, but makes some important advances. 
His dates are very uncertain. He was certainly subsequent to 
Anaximander, and he certainly flourished before 494 B.C., since 
in that year Miletus was destroyed by the Persians in the course 
of their suppression of the Ionian revolt. 

46 



THE MILESIAN SCHOOL 

The fundamental substance, he said, is air. The soul is air; fire 
is rarefied air; when condensed, air becomes first water, then, if 
further condensed, earth, and finally stone. This theory has the 
merit of making all the differences between different substances 
quantitative, depending entirely upon the 

He thought that the earth is shaped like a j Ol c ?? and t ^ a t 
air encompasses everything: "Just as oui|fP unc * . e *. ^olds 
us together, so do breath and air encope3T sOU ^ ' 3el ^ g 1 ' r M" 
It seems that the world breathes. |$ass the whole wor . 

Anaximenes was more admired in ant*/ "mander, 

though almost any modern world would hfluity than Anaxi ya j ua . 
tion. He had an important influence on Pytfcte ^ PP j? l Qn tnuch 
subsequent speculation. The Pythagoreans Tdflp oras *? oiat the 
earth is spherical, but the atomists adhered to the view of Anaxi- 
menes, that it is shaped like a disc. 

The Milesian school is important,, not for what it achieved, but 
for what it attempted. It was brought into existence by the contact 
of the Greek mind with Babylonia and Egypt. Miletus was a rich 
commercial city, in which primitive prejudices and superstitions 
were softened by intercourse with many nations. Ionia, until its 
subjugation by Darius at the beginning of the fifth century, was 
culturally the most important part of the Hellenic world. It was 
almost untouched by the religious movement connected with 
Dionysus and Orpheus; its religion was Olympic, but seems to 
have been not taken very seriously. The speculations of Thales, 
Anaximander, and Anaximenes are to be regarded as scientific 
hypotheses, and seldom show any undue intrusion of anthropo- 
morphic desires and moral ideas. The questions they asked were 
good questions, and their vigour inspired subsequent investigators. 

The next stage in Greek philosophy, which is associated with 
the Greek cities in southern Italy, is more religious, and, in 
particular, more Orphic in some ways more interesting, admir- 
able in achievement, but in spirit less scientific than that of the 
Milesians. 



47 



Chapter III 
PYTHAGORAS 

PYTHAGORAS, whose influence in ancient and modern times 
is my subject ins^his chapter, was intellectually one of the 
most important *J.sn that ever lived, both when he was 
wise and when he was . mwise. Mathematics, in the sense of 
demonstrative deductive argument, begins with him, and in him 
is intimately connected with a peculiar form of mysticism. 
The influence of mathematics on philosophy, partly owing 
to him, has, ever since his time, been both profound and 
unfortunate. 

Let us begin with what little is known of his life. He was a 
native of the island of Samos, and flourished about 532 B.C. 
Some say he was the son of a substantial citizen named Mnesarchos, 
others that he was the son of the ?od Apollo ; I leave the reader to 
take his choice between these alternatives. In his time Samos was 
ruled by the tyrant Polycrates, an old ruffian who became im- 
mensely rich, and had a vast navy. 

Samos was a commercial rival of Miletus; its traders went as 
far afield as Tartessus in Spain, which was famous for its mines. 
Polycrates became tyrant of Samos about 535 B.C., and reigned 
until 515 B.C. He was not much troubled by moral scruples; he 
got rid of his two brothers, who were at first associated with him 
in the tyranny, and he used his navy largely for piracy. 1 le profited 
by the fact that Miletus had recently submitted to Persia. In order 
to obstruct any further westward expansion of the Persians, he 
allied himself with Amasis, king of Egypt. But when Cambyses, 
king of Persia, devoted his full energies to the conquest of Egypt, 
Polycrates realized that he was likely to win, and changed sides. 
He sent a fleet, composed of his political enemies, to attack Egypt ; 
but the crews mutinied and returned to Samos to attack him. 
He got the better of them, however, but fell at last by a treacherous 
appeal to his avarice. The Persian satrap at Sardes represented 
that he intended to rebel against the Great King, and would pay 
vast sums for the help of Polycrates, who went to the mainland 
for an interview, was captured and crucified. * 

Polycrates was a patron of the arts, and beautified Samps with 

48 



PYTHAGORAS 

remarkable public works. Anacreon was his court poet. Pythagoras, 
however, disliked his government, and therefore left Samos. It is 
said, and is not improbable, that Pythagoras visited Egypt, and 
learnt much of his wisdom there; however that may be, it is 
certain that he ultimately established himself at Croton, in 
southern Italy. 

The Greek cities of southern Italy, like Samos and Miletus, 
were rich and prosperous; moreover they were not exposed to 
danger from the Persians. 1 The two greatest were Sybaris and 
Croton. Sybaris has remained proverbial for luxury; its popula- 
tion, in its greatest days, is said by Diodorus to have amounted to 
300,000, though this is no doubt an exaggeration. Croton was 
about equal in sixc to Sybaris. Both cities lived by importing 
Ionian wares into Italy, partly for consumption in that country, 
partly for re-export from the western coast to Gaul and Spain. 
The various Greek cities of Italy fought each other fiercely; when 
Pythatroras arrived in Croton, it had just been defeated by Locri. 
Soon after his arrival, however, Croton was completely victorious 
in a war against Sybaris, which was utterly destroyed (510 B.C.). 
Sybaris had been closely linked in commerce with Miletus. Croton 
was famous for medicine ; a certain Democedes of Croton became 
physician to Polycrates and then to Darius. 

At t'roton Pythagoras founded a society of disciples, which for 
a time was influential in that city. But in the end the citizens 
turned against him, and he moved to Metapontion (also in southern 
Italy), where he died. He soon became a mythical figure, credited 
with miracles and niapic powers, but he was also the founder of a 
school of mathematicians." Thus two opposing traditions disputed 
his memory, and the truth is hard to disentangle. 

l*ythagoras is one of the most interesting and puzzling men in 
history. Not only are the traditions concerning him an almost 
inextricable mixture of truth and falsehood, but even in their 
barest and least disputable form they present us with a very 
curious psychology. He may be described, briefly, as a combina- 
tion of Einstein and Mrs. Eddy. He founded a religion, of which 

1 The (irrck cities of Sicily were in danger from the Carthaginians, 
but in Italy this danger was not felt to be imminent. 

* Aristotle ftays of him that he "first worked at mathematics and 
arithmetic, and u&T\viirdH, at one time, condescended to the wonder- 
working Qjroetised by I'herecydes." 

49 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The changes in the meanings of words are often very instructive. 
I spoke above about the word "orgy"; now I want to speak about 
the word "theory." This was originally an Orphic word, which 
Cornford interprets as "passionate sympathetic contemplation." 
In this state, he says. "The spectator is identified with the suffering 
Cod, dies in his death, and rises again in his new birth." For 
Pythagoras, the "passionate sympathetic contemplation" was 
intellectual, and issued in mathematical knowledge. In this way, 
through Pythagoreanism, "theory" gradually acquired its modern 
meaning; but for all who were inspired by Pythagoras it retained 
an element of ecstatic revelation. To those who have reluctantly 
learnt a little mathematics in school this may seem strange; but 
to those who have experienced the intoxicating delight of sudden 
understanding that mathematics gives, from time to time, to those 
who love it, the Pythagorean view will seem completely natural 
<rven if untrue. It might seem that the empirical philosopher is 
the slave of his material, but that the pure mathematician, like 
the musician, is a free creator of his world of ordered beauty. 

It is interesting to observe, in liurnct's account of the Pytha- 
gorean ethic, the opposition to modern values. In connection with 
a football match, modern-minded men think the players grander 
than the mere spectators. Similarly as regards the State: they 
admire more the politicians who are the contestants in the jrame 
than those who are only onlookers. This change of values is con- 
nected with a change in the social system the warrior, the 
gentleman, the plutocrat, and the dictator, each has his own 
standard of the |?ood and the true. The gentleman has had a lonj: 
inninps in philosophical theory, because he is associated with the 
Greek genius, because the virtue of contemplation acquired 
theological endorsement, and because the ideal of disinterested 
truth dignified the academic life. The gentleman is to be defined 
as one of a society of equals who live on slave labour, or at any 
rate upon the labour of men whose inferiority is unquestioned. 
It should be observed that this definition includes the saint and 
the sage, insofar as these men's lives are contemplative rather 
than active. 

Modern definitions of truth, such as those of pragmatism and 
instrumentalism, which are practical rather than contemplative, 
are inspired by industrialism as opposed to aristocracy. 

Whatever may be thought of a social system which f tolerates 

5* 



PYTHAGORAS 

slavery, it is to gentlemen in the above sense that we owe pure 
mathematics. The contemplative ideal, since it led to the creation 
of pure mathematics, was the source of a useful activity; this 
increased its prestige, and gave it a success in theology, in 
ethics, and in philosophy, which it might not otherwise have 
enjoyed. 

So much by way of explanation of the two aspects of Pythagoras : 
as religious prophet and as pure mathematician. In both respects 
he was immeasurably influential, and the two were not so separate 
as they seem to a modern mind. 

Most sciences, at their inception, have been connected with 
some form of false belief, which gave them a fictitious value. 
Astronomy was connected with astrology, chemistry with alchemy. 
Mathematics was associated with a more refined type of error. 
Mathematical knowledge appeared to be certain, exact, and appli- 
cable to the real world; moreover it was obtained by mere thinking, 
without the need of observation. Consequently, it was thought to 
supply an ideal, from which every-day empirical knowledge fell 
short. It was supposed, on the basis of mathematics, that thought 
is superior to sense, intuition to observation. If the world of sense 
does not fit mathematics, so much the worse for the world of 
sense. In various ways, methods of approaching nearer to the 
mathematician's ideal were sought, and the resulting suggestions 
were the source of much that was mistaken in metaphysics and 
theory of knowledge. This form of philosophy begins with 
Pythagoras. 

Pythagoras, as everyone knows, said that "all things are 
numbers." This statement, interpreted in a modern way, is 
logically nonsense, but what he meant was not exactly nonsense. 
1 le discovered the importance of numbers in music, and the con- 
nection which he established between music and arithmetic sur- 
vives in the mathematical terms "harmonic mean*' and "harmonic 
progression." He thought of numbers as shapes, as they appear 
on dice or playing cards. We still speak of squares and cubes of 
numbers, which are terms that we owe to him. He also spoke of 
oblong numbers, triangular numbers, pyramidal numbers, and so 
on. These were the numbers of pebbles (or, as we should more 
naturally say, shot) required to make the shapes in question. He 
presumably thotight of the world as atomic, and of bodies as built 
up of lyolcculcs composed of atoms arranged in various shapes. 

53 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

In this way he hoped to make arithmetic the fundamental study 
in physics as in aesthetics. 

The greatest discovery of Pythagoras, or of his immediate dis- 
ciples, was the proposition about right-angled triangles, that the 
sum of the squares on the sides adjoining the right angle is equal 
to the square on the remaining side, the hypotenuse. The Egyptians 
had known that a triangle whose sides are 3, 4, 5 has a right angle, 
but apparently the Greeks were the first to observe that 3 a -f 4'- 
= 5 2 , and, acting on this suggestion, to discover a proof of the 
general proposition. 

Unfortunately for Pythaponis, his theorem led at once to the 
discovery of incommcnsurables, which appeared to disprove his 
whole philosophy. In a rijjht-angled isosceles triangle, the square 
on the hypotenuse is double of the square on either side. Let us 
suppose each side an inch long ; then how long is the hypotenuse ? 
Let us suppose its length is mfn inches. Then w 2 /;i 2 ~ 2. If m 
and n have a common factor, divide it out, then either tn or n 
must be odd. Now w 2 = 2 2 , therefore m 8 is even, therefore m is 
even, therefore n is odd. Suppose m -- 2p. Then 4/> 2 = 2 2 , there- 
fore, 2 = 2/> 2 and therefore ;/ is even, contra hyp. Therefore no 
fraction m'n will measure the hypotenuse. The above proof is 
substantially that in Euclid, Book X. 1 

This argument proved that, whatever unit of length we may 
adopt, there are lengths which bear no exact numerical relation 
to the unit, in the sense that there are no two integers iw, , such 
that m times the length in question is n times the unit. This con- 
vinced the Greek mathematicians that geometry must be estab- 
lished independently of arithmetic. There are passapcs in Plato's 
dialogues which prove that the independent treatment of geo- 
metry was well under way in his day; it is perfected in Euclid. 
Euclid, in Book II, proves geometrically many things which we 
should naturally prove by algebra, such as (a -{- bf -~~ a 1 + zah 
+ A 2 . It was because of the difficulty about incommensurable* 
that he considered this course necessary. The same applies to his 
treatment of proportion in Books V and VJ. The whole system 
is logically delightful, and anticipates the rigour of nineteenth- 
century mathematicians. So long as no adequate arithmetical theory 
of incommensurable^ existed, the method of Euclid was the Inrst 

* But not by Euclid. See Heath, Gftek Mathtirutlici. The above proof 
was probably known to Plato. 

54 



PYTHAGORAS 

that was possible in geometry. When Descartes introduced co- 
ordinate geometry, thereby again making arithmetic supreme, he 
assumed the possibility of a solution of the problem of incom- 
mensurables, though in his day no such solution had been 
found. 

The influence of geometry upon philosophy and scientific 
method has been profound. Geometry, as established by the 
Greeks, starts with axioms which are (or are deemed to be) self- 
evident, and proceeds, by deductive reasoning, to arrive at 
theorems that are very far from self-evident. The axioms and 
theorems arc held to be true of actual space, which is something 
given in experience. It thus appeared to be possible to discover 
things about the actual world by first noticing what is self-evident 
and then using deduction. This view influenced Plato and Kant, 
and most of the intermediate philosophers. When the Declaration 
of Independence says "we hold these truths to be self-evident," 
it is modelling itself on Euclid. The eighteenth-century doctrine 
of natural rights is a search for Euclidean axioms in politics. 1 
The form of Newton's Principia, in spite of its admittedly empirical 
material, is entirely dominated by Euclid. Theology, in its exact 
scholastic forms, takes its style from the same source. Personal 
religion is derived from ecstasy, theology from mathematics; and 
both arc to be found in Pythagoras. 

Mathematics is, I believe, the chief source of the belief in 
eternal and exact truth, as well as in a super-sensible intelligible 
\\orld. Geometry deals with exact circles, but no sensible object 
is exactly circular; however carefully we may use our compasses, 
there will be some imperfections and irregularities. This suggests 
the view that all exact reasoning applies to ideal as opposed to 
sensible objects; it is natural to go further, and to argue that 
thought is nobler than sense, and the objects of thought more 
real than those of sense-perception. Mystical doctrines as to the 
relation of time to eternity are also reinforced by pure mathe- 
matics, for mathematical objects, such as numbers, if real at all, 
are eternal and not in time. Such eternal objects can be conceived 
as God's thoughts. Hence Plato's doctrine that God is a geometer, 
and Sir James Jeans' belief that He is addicted to arithmetic. 
Rationalistic as opposed to apocalyptic religion has been, ever 

1 "Self-evident** was substituted by Franklin for Jefferson's "sacred 
and undeniable." 

55 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

since Pythagoras, and notably ever since Plato, very completely 
dominated by mathematics and mathematical method. 

The combination of mathematics and theology, which began 
with Pythagoras, characterized religious philosophy in Greece, in 
the Middle Ages, and in modern times down to Kant. Orphism 
before Pythagoras was analogous to Asiatic mystery religions. But 
in Plato, St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza, 
and Leibniz there is an intimate blending of religion and reasoning, 
of moral aspiration with logical admiration of what is timeless, 
which comes from Pythagoras, and distinguishes the intellec- 
tualized theology of Europe from the more straightforward 
mysticism of Asia. It is only in quite recent times that it has been 
possible to say clearly where Pythagoras was wrong. 1 do not 
know of any other man who has been as influential as he was in 
the sphere of thought. I say this because what appears as Platonism 
is, when analysed, found to be in essence Pythagoreanism. The 
whole conception of an eternal world, revealed to the intellect 
but not to the senses, is derived from him. But for him, Christians 
would not have thought of Christ as the Word; but for him, 
theologians would not have sought logical proofs of Mod and 
immortality. But in him all this is still implicit. I low it became 
explicit will appear as we proceed. 



Chapter IV 
HERACLITUb 

Two opposite attitudes towards the Greeks are common 
at the present day. One, which was practically universal 
from the Renaissance until very recent times, views the 
Greeks with almost superstitious reverence, as the inventors of 
all that is best, and as men of superhuman genius whom the 
moderns cannot hope to equal. The other attitude, inspired by 
the triumphs of science and by an optimistic belief in progress, 
considers the authority of the ancients an incubus, and maintains 
that most of their contributions to thought are now best forgotten. 
1 cannot myself take either of these extreme views; each, I should 
say, is partly right and partly wrong. Before entering upon any 
detail, I shall try to say what sort of wisdom we can still derive 
from the study of Greek thought. 

As to the nature and structure of the world, various hypotheses 
are possible. Progress in metaphysics, so far as it has existed, has 
consisted in a gradual refinement of all these hypotheses, a develop- 
ment of their implications, and a reformulation of each to meet 
the objections urged by adherents of rival hypotheses. To learn 
to conceive the universe according to each of these systems is an 
imaginative delight and an antidote to dogmatism. Moreover, 
even if no one of the hypotheses can be demonstrated, there is 
genuine knowledge in the discovery of what is involved in making 
each of them consistent with itself and with known facts. Now 
almost all the hypotheses that have dominated modern philo- 
sophy were first thought of by the Greeks; their imaginative 
inventiveness in abstract matters can hardly be too highly praised. 
What 1 shall have to say about the Greeks will be said mainly 
from this point of view; I shall regard them as giving birth to 
theories which have had an independent life and growth, and 
which, though at first somewhat infantile, have proved capable 
of surviving and developing throughout more than two thousand 
years. 

The Greeks contributed, it is true, something else which proved 
of more permanent value to abstract thought: they discovered 
mathematics and the art of deductive reasoning. Geometry, in 

57 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

particular, is a Greek invention, without which modern science 
would have been impossible. But in connection with mathematics 
the one-sidedness of the Greek genius appears : it reasoned deduc- 
tively from what appeared self-evident, not inductively from what 
had been observed. Its amazing successes in the employment 
of this method misled not only the ancient world, but the greater 
part of the modern world also. It has only been very slowly that 
scientific method, which seeks to reach principles inductively 
from observation of particular facts, has replaced the Hellenic 
belief in deduction from luminous axioms derived from the mind 
of the philosopher. For this reason, apart from others, it is a 
mistake to treat the Greeks with superstitious reverence. Scientific 
method, though some few among them were the first men who 
had an inkling of it, is, on the whole, alien to their temper of mind, 
and the attempt to glorify them by belittling the intellectual 
progress of the last four centuries has a cramping effect upon 
modern thought. 

There is, however, a more general argument against reverence, 
whether for the Greeks or for anyone else. In studying a philo- 
sopher, the right attitude is neither reverence nor contempt, but 
first a kind of hypothetical sympathy, until it is possible to know 
what it feels like to believe in his theories, and only then a revival 
of the critical attitude, which should resemble, as far as possible, 
the state of mind of a person abandoning opinions which hr has 
hitherto held. Contempt interferes with the first part of this 
process, and reverence with the second. Two things are to be 
remembered: that a man whose opinions and theories are worth 
studying may be presumed to have had some intelligence, but 
that no man is likely to have arrived at complete and final truth 
on any subject whatever. When an intelligent man expresses 
a view which seems to us obviously absurd, \ve should not attempt 
to prove that it is somehow true, but we should try to understand 
how it ever came to seem true. This exercise of historical and 
psychological imagination at once enlarges the scope of our 
thinking, and helps us to realize how foolish many of our own 
cherished prejudices will seem to an age which has a different 
temper of mind. 

Between Pythagoras and Heraclitus, with whom we shall be 
concerned in this chapter, there was another philosopher, of less im- 
portance, namely Xenophancs. His date is uncertain, and 's mainly 

58 



HERACLJTUS 

determined by the fact that he alludes to Pythagoras and Hera- 
clitus alludes to him. He was an Ionian by birth, but lived most 
of his life in southern Italy. He believed all things to be made 
out of earth and water. As regards the gods he was a very emphatic 
free thinker. "Homer and Hesiod have ascribed to the gods all 
things that are a shame and a disgrace among mortals, stealings 
and adulteries and deccivings of one another. . . . Mortals deem 
that gods are begotten as they are, and have clothes like theirs, 
and voice and form . . . yes, and if oxen and horses or lions had 
hands, and could paint with their hands, and produce works of 
art as men do, horses would paint the forms of gods like horses, 
and oxen like oxen, and make their bodies in the image of their 
several kinds. . . . The Ethiopians make their gods black and 
snub-nosed ; the Thracians say theirs have blue eyes and red hair." 
He believed in one God, unlike men in form and thoupht, who 
"without toil swayeth all things by the force of his mind." Xeno- 
phanes made fun of the Pythagorean doctrine of transmigration. 
"Once, they say, he (Pythagoras) was passing by when a dog was 
being ill-treated. *Stop,' he said, 'don't hit it! It is the soul of 
a friend ! I knew it when I heard its voice/ " He believed it 
impossible to ascertain the truth in matters of theology. "The 
certain truth there is no man who knows, nor ever shall be, about 
the pods and all the things whereof I speak. Yea, even if a man 
should chance to say something utterly right, still he himself 
knows it not there is nowhere anything but guessing." 1 

Xenophanes has his place in the succession of rationalists, who 
were opposed to the mystical tendencies of Pythagoras and others, 
but as an independent thinker he is not in the first rank. 

The doctrine of Pythagoras, as we saw, is very difficult to 
disentangle from that of his disciples, and although Pythagoras 
himself is very early, the influence of his school is mainly sub- 
sequent to that of various other philosophers. The first of these 
to invent a theory which is still influential was Heraclitus, who 
flourished about 500 B.C. Of his life very little is known, except 
that he was an aristocratic citizen of Ephesus. He was chiefly 
famous in antiquity for his doctrine that everything is in a state 
of flux, but this, as we shall see, is only one aspect of his meta- 
physics. 

iieraciitus, though an Ionian, was not in the scientific tradition 

* (Juotnl from Kdwyn itevan, Stoic t an d Sceptics, Oxford, 1913, p. 121. 

59 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of the Milesians. 1 He was a mystic, but of a peculiar kind. He 
regarded fire as the fundamental substance ; everything, like flame 
in a fire, is born by the death of something else. "Mortals are 
immortals, and immortals are mortals, the one living the other's 
death and dying the other's life." There is unity in the world, 
but it is a unity formed by the combination of opposite?. "All 
things come out of the one, and the one out of all things' 1 ; but 
the many have less reality than the one, which is God. 

From what survives of his writings he does not appear as an 
amiable character. He was much addicted to contempt, and was 
the reverse of a democrat. Concerning his fellow-citizens, he 
says: "The Kphesians would do well to hane themselves, even- 
grown man of them, and leave the city to beardless lads; for they 
have cast out Hermodorus, the best man among them, saying: 
'We will have none who is best among us; if there be any such, 
let him be so elsewhere and among others.' " He speaks ill of 
all his eminent predecessors, with a single exception. "Homer 
should be turned out of the lists and whipped." "Of all whose 
discourses I have heard, there is not one who attains to under- 
standing that wisdom is apart from all." "The learning of many 
things teachelh not understanding, else would it have taught 
Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hecataeus." 
"Pythagoras . . . claimed for his own wisdom what was but a 
knowledge of many things and an art of mischief." The one 
exception to his condemnations is Tcutamus, who is signalled 
out as "of more account than the rest." When we inquire the 
reason for this praise, we find that Tcutamus said "most men 
are bad." 

His contempt for mankind leads him to think that only force 
will compel them to act for their own good. He says: "livery beast 
is driven to the pasture with blows"; and again: "Asses would 
rather have straw than gold." 

As might be expected, Heraclitus believes in war. "War," he 
says, "is the father of all and the king of all; and some he has 
made gods and some men, some bond and some free." Again: 
"Homer was wrong in saying: * Would that strife might perish 
from among gods and men!' He did not see that he was praying 
for the destruction of the universe; for, if his prayer were heard, 

1 Comfofd, op. rit. (p. 184), ernphasixrs this, I think rightly. Herat liru 
is often misunderstood through I>CWK aasimilatrd to other lonmns. 

60 



HERACLITUS 

all things would pass away." And yet again: "We must know 
that war is common to all and strife is justice, and that all things 
come into being and pass away through strife." 

His ethic is a kind of proud asceticism, very similar to Nietzsche's, 
lie regards the soul as a mixture of fire and water, the fire being 
noble and the water ignoble. The soul that has most fire he 
calls "dry." "The dry soul is the wisest and best." "It is pleasure 
to souls to become moist." "A man, when he gets drunk, is led 
by a beardless lad, tripping, knowing not where he steps, having 
his soul moist." "It is death to souls to become water." "It is 
hard to fight with one's heart's desire. Whatever it wishes to 
get, it purchases at the cost of soul." "It is not good for men to 
get all that they wish to get." One may say that Heraclitus values 
power obtained through self-mastery, and despises the passions 
that distract men from their central ambitions. 

The attitude of Heraclitus to the religions of his time, at any 
rate the Bacchic religion, is largely hostile, but not with the 
hostility of a scientific rationalist. He has his own religion, and 
in part interprets current theology to fit his doctrine, in part 
rejects it with considerable scorn. He has been called Bacchic 
(by C'ornforti), and regarded as an interpreter of the mysteries 
(by Pfieiderer). I do not think the relevant fragments bear out 
this view. He says, for example: "The mysteries practised among 
men arc unholy mysteries/' This suggests that he had in mind 
possible mysteries that would not be "unholy," but would be 
quite different from those that existed. He would have been a 
religious reformer, if he had not been too scornful of the vulgar 
to engage in propaganda. 

The following are all the extant sayings of Heraclitus that bear 
on his attitude to the theology of his day. 

The Lord whose is the oracle of Delphi neither utters nor hides 
his meaning, but shows it by a sign. 

And the Sibyl, with raving lips uttering things mirthless, un- 
bedi/cnetl and unpei fumed, reaches over a thousand years with 
her \oice, thanks to the god in her. 

Souls smell in Hades. 

(Jieater deaths win greater portions. (Those who die them 
become gods.) 

Night-\valk(TS,*mairicians, priests of Bacchus, and priestesses of 
the wine^val, mystery-mongers. 

61 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The mysteries practised among men are unholy mysteries. 

And they pray to these images, as if one were to talk with a 
man's house, knowing not what gods or heroes are. 

For if it were not to Dionysus that they made a procession and 
sang the shameful phallic hymn, they would be acting most 
shamelessly. But Hades is the same as Dionysus in whose honour 
they go mad and keep the feast of the wine-vat. 

They vainly purify themselves by defiling themselves with 
blood, just as if one who had stepped into the mud were to wash 
his feet in mud. Any man who marked him doing this, would 
deem him mad. 

Heraclitus believed fire to be the primordial element, out of 
which everything else had arisen. Thales, the reader will remember, 
thought everything was made of water; Anaximenes thought air 
was the primitive element; Heraclitus preferred fire. At last 
Empedocles suggested a statesmanlike compromise by allowing 
four elements, earth, air, fire and water. The chemistry of the 
ancients stopped dead at this point. No further progress was made 
in this science until the Mohammedan alchemists embarked 
upon their search for the philosopher's stone, the elixir of life, 
and a method of transmuting base metals into gold. 

The metaphysics of Heraclitus are sufficiently dynamic to 
satisfy the most hustling of moderns : 

"This world, which is the same for all, no one of gods or men 
has made; but it was ever, is now, and ever shall be an ever-living 
Fire, with measures kindling and measures going out.*' 

"The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea; and half of 
the sea is earth, half whirlwind." 

In such a world, perpetual change was to be expected, ami 
perpetual change was what Heraclitus believed in. 

He had, however, another doctrine on which he set even more 
store than on the perpetual flux; this was the doctrine of the 
mingling of opposites. "Men do not know," he says, "how what 
is at variance agrees with itself. It is an attunement of opposite 
tensions, like that of the bow and the lyre." His belief in strife 
is connected with this theory, for in strife opposites combine to 
produce a motion which is a harmony. There is a unity in the 
world, but it is a unity resulting from diversity: 

"Couples are things whole and things not whole, what is drawn 
together and what is drawn asunder, the harmonious an^I the dis- 

62 



HERACLITUS 

cordant. The one is made up of all things, and all things issue 
from the one." 

Sometimes he speaks as if the unity were more fundamental 
than the diversity : 

"Good and ill are one/ 1 

"To God all things are fair and good and right, but men hold 
some things wrong and some right." 

"The way up and the way down is one and the same." 

"God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, 
surfeit and hunger; but he takes various shapes, just as fire, when 
it is mingled with spices, is named according to the savour of each." 

Nevertheless, there would be no unity if there were not opposites 
to combine: "it is the opposite which is good for us." 

This doctrine contains the germ of Hegel's philosophy, which 
proceeds by a synthcsi/ing of opposites. 

The metaphysics of Ileraclitus, like that of Anaximander, is 
dominated by a conception of cosmic justice, which prevents the 
strife of opposites from ever issuing in the complete victory of 
cither. 

"All things are an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, 
even as wares for gold and gold for wares." 

"Fire lives the death of air, and air lives the death of fire; water 
lives the death of earth, earth that of water." 

"The sun will not overstep his measures ; if he does, the Erinyes, 
the handmaids of Justice, will find him out." 

"We must know that war is common to all, and strife is justice." 

Ileraclitus repeatedly speaks of "God" as distinct from "the 
gods." "The way of man has no wisdom, but that of God has. . . . 
Man is called a baby by God, even as a child by a man. . . . The 
wisest man is an ape compared to God, just as the most beautiful 
ape is ugly compared to man." 

God, no doubt, is the embodiment of cosmic justice. 

The doctrine that everything is in a state of flux is the most 
famous of the opinions of Ileraclitus, and the one most emphasized 
by his disciples, as described in Plato's Theaetetus. 

"You cannot step twice into the same river; for fresh waters 
are ever flowing in upon you." 1 

"The sun is ne^w every day." 

1 But cf. *'\Ve step and do not step into the same rivers: we are, and 
are not/' * 

63 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

His belief in universal change is commonly supposed to have 
been expressed in the phrase "all things are flowing/ 1 but this is 
probably apocryphal, like Washington's "Father, I cannot tell a 
lie" and Wellington's "Up Guards and at 'em." His words, like 
those of all the philosophers before Plato, are only known through 
quotations, largely made by Plato or Aristotle for the sake of 
refutation. When one thinks what would become of any modern 
philosopher if he were only known through the polemics of his 
rivals, one can see how admirable the pre-Socratics must have 
been, since even through the mist of malice spread by their 
enemies they still appear great. However this may be, Plato and 
Aristotle agree that Heraclitus taught that "nothing ever is, 
everything is becoming" (Plato), and that "nothing steadfastly is" 
(Aristotle). 

I shall return to the consideration of this doctrine in connection 
with Plato, who is much concerned to refute it. For the present, I 
shall not investigate what philosophy has to say about it, but 
only what the poets have felt and the men of science have taught. 

The search for something permanent is one of the deepest of 
the instincts leading men to philosophy. It is derived, no doubt, 
from love of home and desire for a refuge from danger; we find, 
accordingly, that it is most passionate in those whose lives are 
most exposed to catastrophe. Religion seeks permanence in two 
forms, God and immortality. In God is no variableness neither 
shadow of turning; the life after death is eternal and unchanging. 
The cheerfulness of the nineteenth century turned men against 
these static conceptions, and modern liberal theology believes 
that there is progress in heaven and evolution in the Godhead. 
But even in this conception there is something permanent, namely 
progress itself and its immanent goal. And a dose of disaster is 
likely to bring men's hopes back to their older super-terrestrial 
forms: if life on earth is despaired of, it is only in heaven that 
peace can be sought. 

The poets have lamented the power of Time to sweep away 
every object of their love. 

Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth, 
And delves the parallels in beauty 'a brow, 
Feeds on the rarities of nature's trurn, 
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow. 



HERACLITUS 

They generally add that their own verses are indestructible: 

And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand. 
Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. 

But this is only a conventional literary conceit. 

Philosophically inclined mystics, unable to deny that whatever 
is in time is transitory, have invented a conception of eternity as 
not persistence through endless time, but existence outside the 
whole temporal process. Eternal life, according to some theologians, 
for example, Dean Inge, does not mean existence throughout 
every moment of future time, but a mode of being wholly inde- 
pendent of time, in which there is no before and after, and there- 
fore no logical possibility of change. This view has been poetically 
expressed by Vaughan : 

I saw Eternity the other night, 
Like a great ring of pure and endless light, 

All calm, as it was bright; 
And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years, 

Driven by the spheres 
Like a vast shadow moved ; in which the world 

And all her train were hurled. 

Several of the most famous systems of philosophy have tried 
to state this conception in sober prose, as expressing what reason, 
patiently pursued, will ultimately compel us to believe. 

Heraclitus himself, for all his belief in change, allowed something 
everlasting. The conception of eternity (as opposed to endless 
duration), which comes from Parmenides, is not to be found in 
Heraclitus, but in his philosophy the central fire never dies: the 
world "was ever, is now, and ever shall be, an ever-living Fire/' 
But fire is something continually changing, and its permanence is 
rather that of a process than that of a substance though this view 
should not be attributed to Heraclitus. 

Science, like philosophy, has sought to escape from the doctrine 
of perpetual flux by finding some permanent substratum amid 
changing phenomena. Chemistry seemed to satisfy this desire. It 
was found that fire, which appears to destroy, only transmutes: 
elements are recombined, but each atom that existed before com- 
bustion still exists when the process is completed. Accordingly it 
was supposed that atoms arc indestructible, and that all change 
in the physical world consists merely in re-arrangement of per- 

65 C 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sistent elements. This view prevailed until the discovery of radio- 
activity, when it was found that atoms could disintegrate. 

Nothing daunted, the physicists invented new and smaller units 
called electrons and protons, out of which atoms were composed ; 
and these units were supposed, for a few years, to have the in- 
destructibility formerly attributed to atoms. Unfortunately it 
seemed that protons and electrons could meet and explode, 
forming, not new matter, but a wave of energy spreading through 
the universe with the velocity of light. Energy had to replace 
matter as what is permanent. But energy, unlike matter, is not a 
refinement of the common-sense notion of a "thing"; it is merely 
a characteristic of physical processes. It might be fancifully 
identified with the Heraclitean Fire, but it is the burning, not 
what burns. "What burns" has disappeared from modern physics. 

Passing from the small to the large, astronomy no longer allows 
us to regard the heavenly bodies as everlasting. The planets came 
out of the sun, and the sun came out of a nebula. It has lasted 
some time, and will last some time longer; but sooner or later 
probably in about a million million years it will explode, destroy- 
ing all the planets. So at least the astronomers say; perhaps as 
the fatal day draws nearer they will find some mistake in their 
calculations. 

The doctrine of the perpetual flux, as taught by Heraclitus, is 
painful, and science, as we have seen, can do nothing to refute it. 
One of the main ambitions of philosophers has been to revive 
hopes that science seemed to have killed. Philosophers, accordingly, 
have sought, with great persistence, for something not subject to 
the empire of Time. This search begins with Parmenidcs. 



Chapter V 
PARMENIDES 

THE Greeks were not addicted to moderation, cither in 
their theories or in their practice. Heraclitus maintained 
that everything changes; Parmenides retorted that nothing 
changes. 

Parmenides was a native of Elea, in the south of Italy, and 
flourished in the first half of the fifth century B.C. According to 
Plato, Socrates in his youth (say about the year 450 B.C.) had an 
interview with Parmenides, then an old man, and learnt much 
from him. Whether or not this interview is historical, we may at 
least infer, what is otherwise evident, that Plato himself was 
influenced by the doctrines of Parmenides. The south Italian and 
Sicilian philosophers were more inclined to mysticism and religion 
than those of Ionia, who were on the whole scientific and sceptical 
in their tendencies. But mathematics, under the influence of 
Pythagoras, flourished more in Magna Graecia than in Ionia; 
mathematics at that time, however, was entangled with mysticism. 
Parmenides was influenced by Pythagoras, but the extent of this 
influence is conjectural. What makes Parmenides historically 
important is that he invented a form of metaphysical argument 
that, in one form or another, is to be found in most subsequent 
metaphysicians down to and including Hegel. He is often said to 
liave invented logic, but what he really invented was metaphysics 
based on logic. 

The doctrine of Parmenides was set forth in a poem On Nature. 
He considered the senses deceptive, and condemned the multitude 
of sensible things as mere illusion. The only true being is "the 
One/' which is infinite and indivisible. It is not, as in Heraclitus, 
a union of opposites, since there are no opposites. He apparently 
thought, for instance, that "cold" means only "not hot," and 
"dark" means only "not light." "The One" is not conceived by 
Parmenides as we conceive God ; he seems to think of it as material 
and extended, for he speaks of it as a sphere. But it cannot be 
divided, because the whole of it is present everywhere. 

Parmenides dk'ides his teaching into two parts, called respec- 
tively "the way of truth" and "the way of opinion." We need not 

67 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sistent elements. This view prevailed until the discovery of radio- 
activity, when it was found that atoms could disintegrate. 

Nothing daunted, the physicists invented new and smaller units, 
called electrons and protons, out of which atoms were composed ; 
and these units were supposed, for a few years, to have die in- 
destructibility formerly attributed to atoms. Unfortunately it 
seemed that protons and electrons could meet and explode, 
forming, not new matter, but a wave of energy spreading through 
the universe with the velocity of light. Energy had to replace 
matter as what is permanent. But energy, unlike matter, is not a 
refinement of the common-sense notion of a "thing"; it is merely 
a characteristic of physical processes. It might be fancifully 
identified with the Heraclitean Fire, but it is the burning, not 
what burns. "What burns" has disappeared from modern physics. 

Passing from the small to the large, astronomy no longer allows 
us to regard the heavenly bodies as everlasting. The planets came 
out of the sun, and the sun came out of a nebula. It has lasted 
some time, and will last some time longer; but sooner or later 
probably in about a million million years it will explode, destroy- 
ing all the planets. So at least the astronomers say; perhaps as 
the fatal day draws nearer they will find some mistake in their 
calculations. 

The doctrine of the perpetual flux, as taught by Heraclitus, is 
painful, and science, as we have seen, can do nothing to refute it. 
One of the main ambitions of philosophers has been to revive 
hopes that science seemed to have killed. Philosophers, accordingly, 
have sought, with great persistence, for something not subject to 
the empire of Time. This search begins with Parmenides. 



66 



Chapter V 
PARMENIDES 

THE Greeks were not addicted to moderation, either in 
their theories or in their practice. Heraclitus maintained 
that everything clianges; Parmenides retorted that nothing 
changes. 

Parmenides was a native of Elea, in the south of Italy, and 
flourished in the first half of the fifth century B.C. According to 
Plato, Socrates in his youth (say about the year 450 B.C.) had an 
interview with Parmenides, then an old man, and learnt much 
from him. Whether or not this interview is historical, we may at 
least infer, what is otherwise evident, that Plato himself was 
influenced by the doctrines of Parmenides. The south Italian and 
Sicilian philosophers were more inclined to mysticism and religion 
than those of Ionia, who were on the whole scientific and sceptical 
in their tendencies. But mathematics, under the influence of 
Pythagoras, flourished more in Magna Graecia than in Ionia; 
mathematics at that time, however, was entangled with mysticism. 
Parmenides was influenced by Pythagoras, but the extent of this 
influence is conjectural. What makes Parmenides historically 
important is that he invented a form of metaphysical argument 
that, in one form or another, is to be found in most subsequent 
metaphysicians down to and including Hegel. He is often said to 
have invented logic, but what he really invented was metaphysics 
based on logic. 

The doctrine of Parmenides was set forth in a poem On Nature, 
lie considered the senses deceptive, and condemned the multitude 
of sensible things as mere illusion. The only true being is "the 
One, 1 ' which is infinite and indivisible. It is not, as in Heraclitus, 
a union of opposites, since there are no opposites. He apparently 
thought, for instance, that "cold" means only "not hot," and 
"dark" means only "not light." "The One" is not conceived by 
Parmenides as we conceive God ; he seems to think of it as material 
and extended, for he speaks of it as a sphere. But it cannot be 
divided, because the whole of it is present everywhere. 

Parmenides divides his teaching into two parts, called respec- 
tively "the way of truth 19 and "the way of opinion." We need not 

6? 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

concern ourselves with the latter. What he says about the way of 
truth, so far as it has survived, is, in its essential points, as 
follows: 

"Thou canst not know what is not that is impossible nor 
utter it; for it is the same thing that can be thought and that 
can be." 

"How, then, can what is be going to be in the future? Or how 
could it come into being? If it came into being, it is not; nor is it 
if it is going to be in the future. Thus is becoming extinguished and 
passing away not to be heard of. 

"The thing that can be thought and that for the sake of which 
the thought exists is the same ; for you cannot find thought without 
something that is, as to which it is uttered." 1 

The essence of this argument is: When you think, you think of 
something; when you use a name, it must be the name of some- 
thing. Therefore both thought and language require objects out- 
side themselves. And since you can think of a thing or speak of it 
at one time as well as at another, whatever can be thought of or 
spoken of must exist at all times. Consequently there can be no 
change, since change consists in things coming into being or 
ceasing to be. 

This is the first example in philosophy of an argument from 
thought and language to the world at large. It cannot of course 
be accepted as valid, but it is worth while to see what element of 
truth it contains. 

We can put the argument in this way: if language is not just 
nonsense, words must mean something, and in general they must 
not mean just other words, but something that is there whether 
we talk of it or not. Suppose, for example, that you talk of George 
Washington. Unless there were a historical person who had that 
name, the name (it would seem) would be meaningless, and 
sentences containing the name would be nonsense. Parmenides 
maintains that not only must George Washington have existed in 
the past, but in some sense he must still exist, since we can still 
use his name significantly. This seems obviously untrue, but 
how are we to get round the argument ? 
Let us take an imaginary person, say Hamlet. Consider the 

1 Burnet'i note : "The meaning, I think, it this. 4 . . There can be 
no thought corresponding to a name that i not the name of something 
real." ' 

68 



PARMENIDES 

statement "Hamlet was Prince of Denmark." In some sense this 
is true, but not in the plain historical sense. The true statement is 
"Shakespeare says that Hamlet was Prince of Denmark," or, more 
explicitly, "Shakespeare says there was a Princ'e of Denmark 
called 'Hamlet.' " Here there is no longer anything imaginary. 
Shakespeare and Denmark and the noise "Hamlet" are all real, 
but the noise "Hamlet" is not really a name, since nobody is really 
called "Hamlet." If you say " 'Hamlet* is the name of an imaginary 
person," that is not strictly correct; you ought to say "It is ima- 
gined that 'Hamlet' is the name of a real person." 

Hamlet is an imagined individual; unicorns are an imagined 
species. Some sentences in which the word "unicorn" occurs are 
true, and some are false, but in each case not directly. Consider 
"a unicorn has one horn" and "a cow has two horns." To prove 
the latter, you have to lopk at a cow ; it is not enough to say that 
in some book cows are said to have two horns. But the evidence 
that unicorns have one horn is only to be found in books, and in 
fact the correct statement is: "Certain books assert that there are 
animals with one horn called 'unicorns/ " All statements about 
unicorns are really about the word "unicorn," just as all statements 
about Hamlet are really about the word "Hamlet." 

But it is obvious that, in most cases, we are not speaking of 
words, but of what the words mean. And this brings us back to 
the argument of Parmenides, that if a word can be used signifi- 
cantly it must mean something, not nothing, and therefore what 
the word means must in some sense exist. 

What, then, are we to say about George Washington ? It seems 
we have only two alternatives: one is to say that he still exists; the 
other is to say that, when we use the words "George Washington," 
we are not really speaking of the man who bore that name. Either 
seems a paradox, but the latter is less of a paradox, and I shall 
try to show a sense in which it is true. 

Parmenides assumes that words have a constant meaning; this 
is really the basis of his argument, which he supposes unquestion- 
able. But although the dictionary or the encyclopaedia gives what 
may be called the official and socially sanctioned meaning of a 
word, no two people who use the same word have just the same 
thought in their minds. 

George Washington himself could use his name and the word 
"I" as synonyms. He could perceive his own thoughts and the 

69 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

movements of his body, and could therefore use his name with a 
fuller meaning than was possible for any one else. His friends, 
when in his presence, could perceive the movements of his body, 
and could divine his thoughts; to them, the name "George 
Washington" still denoted something concrete in their own 
experience. After his death they had to substitute memories for 
perceptions, which involved a change in the mental processes 
taking place when they used his name. For us, who never knew 
him, the mental processes are again different. We may think of 
his picture, and say to ourselves "yes, that man." We may think 
"the first President of the United States." If we are very ignorant, 
he may be to us merely "The man who was called * George 
Washington.' " Whatever the name suggests to us, it must be not 
the man himself, since we never knew him, but something now 
present to sense or memory or thought. This shows the fallacy of 
the argument of Parmenides. 

This perpetual change in the meanings of words is concealed 
by the fact that, in general, the change nukes no difference to the 
truth or falsehood of the propositions in which the words occur. 
If you take any true sentence in which the name "George Washing- 
ton" occurs, it will, as a rule, remain true if you substitute the 
phrase "the first President of the United States." There are ex- 
ceptions to this rule. Before Washington's election, a man might 
say "I hope George Washington will be the first President of the 
United States," but he would not say "I hope the first President 
of the United States will be the first President of the United 
States" unless he had an unusual passion for the law of identity. 
But it is easy to make a rule for excluding these exceptional cases, 
and in those that remain you may substitute for "George Washing- 
ton" any descriptive phrase that applies to him alone. And it is 
only by means of such phrases that we know what we know about 
him. 

Parmenides contends that, since we can now know what is com- 
monly regarded as past, it cannot really be past, but must, in some 
sense, exist now. Hence he infers that there is no such thing as 
change. What we have been saying about George Washington 
meets this argument. It may be said, in a sense, that we have no 
knowledge of the past. When you recollect, the recollection occurs 
now, and is not identical with the event recollected. But the re- 
collection affords a description of the past event, and for most 



PARMENIOES 

practical purposes it is unnecessary to distinguish between the 
description and what it describes. 

This whole argument shows how easy it is to draw metaphysical 
conclusions from language, and how the only way to avoid 
fallacious arguments of this kind is to push the logical and psy- 
chological study of language further than has been done by most 
metaphysicians. 

I think, however, that, if Parmenides could return from the dead 
and read what I have been saying, he would regard it as very super- 
ficial. "How do you know," he would ask, "that your statements 
about George Washington refer to a past time? By your own 
account, the direct reference is to things now present; your recol- 
lections, for instance, happen now, not at the time that you think 
you recollect. If memory is to be accepted as a source of knowledge, 
the past must be before the mind now, and must therefore in some 
sense still exist/' 

I will not attempt to meet this argument now ; it requires a dis- 
cussion of memory, which is a difficult subject. I have put the 
argument here to remind the reader that philosophical theories, 
if they are important, can generally be revived in a new form after 
being refuted as originally stated. Refutations are seldom final; 
in most cases, they are only a prelude to further refinements. 

What subsequent philosophy, down to quite modern times, 
accepted from Parmenides. was not the impossibility of all change, 
which was too violent a paradox, but the indestructibility of sub- 
it once. The word "substance" did not occur in his immediate 
successors, but the concept is already present in their speculations. 
A substance was supposed to be the persistent subject of varying 
predicates. As such it became, and remained for more than two 
thousand years, one of the fundamental concepts of philosophy, 
psychology, physics, and theology. I shall have much to say about 
it at a later stage. For the present, I am merely concerned to note 
that it was introduced as a way of doing justice to the arguments 
of Parmenides without denying obvious facts. 



Chapter VI 
EMPEDOCLES 

E IHE mixture of philosopher, prophet, man of science, and 
I charlatan, which we found already in Pythagoras, was ex- 
JL emplified very completely in Empedocles, who flourished 
about 440 B.C., and was thus a younger contemporary of Par- 
menides, though his doctrine had in some ways more affinity with 
that of Heraclitus. He was a citizen of Acragas, on the south coast 
of Sicily; he was a democratic politician, who at the same time 
claimed to be a god. In most Greek cities, and especially in those 
of Sicily, there was a constant conflict between democracy and 
tyranny; the leaders of whichever party was at the moment 
defeated were executed or exiled. Those who were exiled seldom 
scrupled to enter into negotiations with the enemies of Greece 
Persia in the East, Carthage in the West. Empedocles, in due 
course, was banished, but he appears, after his banishment, to 
have preferred the career of a sage to that of an intriguing refugee. 
It seems probable that in youth he was more or less Orphic ; that 
before his exile he combined politics and science; and that it 
was only in later life, as an exile, that he became a prophet. 

Legend had much to say about Empedocles. He was supposed 
to have worked miracles, or what seemed such, sometimes by 
magic, sometimes by means of his scientific knowledge. He could 
control the winds, we are told; he restored to life a woman who 
had seemed dead for thirty days; finally, it is said, he died by 
leaping into the crater of Etna to prove that he was a god. In the 
words of the poet : 

Great Empedocles, that ardent soul, 
Leapt into Etna, and was roasted whole. 

Matthew Arnold wrote a poem on this subject, but, although one 
of his worst, it does not contain the above couplet. 

Like Parmenides, Empedocles wrote in verse. Lucretius, who 
was influenced by him, praised him highly as a poet, but on this 
subject opinions were divided. Since only fragments of his writings 
have survived, his poetic merit must remain in doubt. 

It is necessary to deal separately with his science and his religion, 

72 



BMPEDOCLBS 

as they are not consistent with each other. I shall consider first 
his science, then his philosophy, and finally his religion. 

His most important contribution to science was his discovery of 
air as a separate substance. This he proved by the observation that 
when a bucket or any similar vessel is put upside down into water, 
the water does not enter into the bucket. He says: 

"When a girl, playing with a water-clock of shining brass, puts 
the orifice of the pipe upon her comely hand, and dips the water- 
clock into the yielding mass of silvery water, the stream does not 
then flow into the vessel, but the bulk of the air inside, pressing 
upon the close-packed perforations, keeps it out till she uncovers 
the compressed stream ; but then air escapes and an equal volume 
of water runs in." 

This passage occurs in an explanation of respiration. 

He also discovered at least one example of centrifugal force: 
that if a cup of water is whirled round at the end of a string, the 
water does not come out. 

He knew that there is sex in plants, and he had a theory (some- 
what fantastic, it must be admitted) of evolution and the survival 
of the fittest. Originally, "countless tribes of mortal creatures were 
scattered abroad endowed with all manner of forms, a wonder to 
behold." There were heads without necks, arms without shoulders, 
eyes without foreheads, solitary limbs seeking for union. These 
things joined together as each might chance ; there were shambling 
creatures with countless hands, creatures with faces and breasts 
looking in different directions, creatures with the bodies of oxen 
and the faces of men, and others with the faces of oxen and the 
bodies of men. There were hermaphrodites combining the natures 
of men and women, but sterile. In the end, only certain forms 
survived. 

As regards astronomy: he knew that the moon shines by re- 
flected light, and thought that this is also true of the sun; he said 
that light takes time to travel, but so little time that we cannot 
observe it; he knew that solar eclipses are caused by the inter- 
position of the moon, a fact which he seems to have learnt from 
Anaxagoras. 

He was the founder of the Italian school of medicine, and the 
medical school which sprang from him influenced both Plato and 
Aristotle. According to Burnet (p. 234), it affected the whole 
tendency pf scientific and philosophical thinking. 

73 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

All this shows the scientific vigour of his time, which was not 
equalled in the later ages of Greece. 

I come now to his cosmology. It was he, as already mentioned, 
who established earth, air, fire, and water as the four elements 
(though the word "element" was not used by him). Each of these 
was everlasting, but they could be mixed in different proportions 
and thu produce the changing complex substances that we find 
in the world. They were combined by Love and separated by 
Strife. Love and Strife were, for Empedocles, primitive substances 
on a level with earth, air, fire, and water. There were periods when 
Love was in the ascendant, and others when Strife was the stronger. 
There had been a golden age when Love was completely vic- 
torious. In that age, men worshipped only the Cyprian Aphrodite 
(fr. 128). The changes in the world are not governed by any 
purpose, but only by Chance and Necessity. There is a cycle: 
when the elements have been thoroughly mixed by Love, Strife 
gradually sorts them out again; when Strife has separated them, 
Love gradually reunites them. Thus even- compound substance 
is temporary; only the elements, together with Love and Strife, 
are everlasting. 

There is a similarity to Heraclitus, but a softening, since it is 
not Strife alone, but Strife and Love together, that produce 
change. Plato couples Heraclitus and Empedocles in the 
Sophist (242): 

There are Ionian, and in more recent time Sicilian, muses, who 
have arrived at the conclusion that to unite the two principles (of 
the One and the Many), is safer, and to say that being is one and 
many, and that these are held together by enmity and friendship, 
ever parting, ever meeting, as the severer Muses assert, while the 
gentler ones do not insist on the perpetual strife and peace, but 
admit a relaxation and alternation of them; peace and unity 
sometimes prevailing under the sway of Aphrodite, and then 
again plurality and war, by reason of a principle of strife. 

Empedocles held that the material world is a sphere ; that in the 
Golden Age Strife was outside and Love inside ; then, gradually, 
Strife entered and Love was expelled, until, at the worst, Strife 
will be wholly within and Love wholly without the sphere. Then 
though for what reason is not clear an opposite movement 
begins, until the Golden Age returns, but not for ever. The whole 
cycle is then repeated. One might have supposed \hat either 

74 



EMPEDOCLES 

extreme could be stable, but that is not the view of Empedocles. 
He wished to explain motion while taking account of the argu- 
ments of Parmenides, and he had no wish to arrive, at any stage, 
at an unchanging universe. 

The views of Empedocles on religion are, in the main, Pytha- 
gorean. In a fragment which, in all likelihood, refers to Pythagoras, 
he says: "There was among them a man of rare knowledge, most 
skilled in all manner of wise works, a man who had won the 
utmost wealth of wisdom ; for whensoever he strained with all his 
mind, he easily saw everything of all the things that are, in ten, 
yea twenty lifetimes of men." In the Golden Age, as already 
mentioned, men worshipped only Aphrodite, "and the altar did 
not reek with pure bull's blood, but this was held in the greatest 
abomination among men, to eat the goodly limbs after tearing out 
the life." 

At one time he speaks of himself exuberantly as a god: 

Friends, that inhabit the great city looking down on the yellow 
rock of Acragas, up by the citadel, busy in goodly works, harbour 
of honour for the stranger, men unskilled in meanness, all hail. I 
go about among you an immortal god, no mortal now, honoured 
among all as is meet, crowned with fillets and flowery garlands. 
Straightway, whenever I enter with these in my train, both men 
and women, into the flourishing towns, is reverence done me; they 
go after me in countless throngs, asking of me what is the way to 
gain; some desiring oracles, while some, who for many a weary 
day have been pierced by the grievous pangs of all manner 
of sickness, beg to hear from me the word of healing. . . . But why 
do I harp on these things, as if it were any great matter that I 
should surpass mortal, perishable men?" 

At another time he feels himself a great sinner, undergoing 
expiation for his impiety: 

There is an oracle of Necessity, an ancient ordinance of the gods, 
eternal and sealed fast by broad oaths, that whenever one of the 
daemons, whose portion is length of days, has sinfully polluted his 
hands with blood, or followed strife and forsworn himself, he 
must wander thrice ten thousand years from the abodes of the 
blessed, being born throughout the time in all manners of mortal 
forms, changing jme toilsome path of life for another. For the 
mighty Air drives him into the Sea, and the Sea spews him forth 
upon the. dry Earth; Earth tosses him into the beams of the 

75 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

blazing Sun, and he flings him back to the eddies of Air. One takes 
him from the other, and all reject him. One of these I now am, 
an exile and a wanderer from the gods, for that I put my trust 
in an insensate strife. 

What his sin had been, we do not know; perhaps nothing that 
we should think very grievous. For he says : 

"Ah, woe is me that the pitiless day of death did not destroy 
me ere ever I wrought evil deeds of devouring with my lips 1 ... 

"Abstain wholly from laurel leaves . . . 

"Wretches, utter wretches, keep your hands from beans!" 

So perhaps he had done nothing worse than munching laurel 
leaves or guzzling beans. 

The most famous passage in Plato, in which he compares this 
world to a cave, in which we sec only shadows of the realities in 
the bright world above, is anticipated by Empedoclcs; its origin 
is in the teaching of the Orphics. 

There are some presumably those who abstain from sin 
through many incarnations who at last achieve immortal bliss 
in the company of the gods : 

But at the last, they 1 appear among mortal men as prophets, 
song-writers, physicians, and princes ; and thence they rise up as 
gods exalted in honour, sharing the hearth of the other gods and 
the same table, free from human woes, safe from destiny, and in- 
capable of hurt. 

In all this, it would seem, there is very little that was not already 
contained in the teaching of Orphism and Pythagoreanism. 

The originality of Empedocies, outside science, consists in the 
doctrine of the four elements, and in the use of the two principles 
of Love and Strife to explain change. 

He rejected monism, and regarded the course of nature as 
regulated by chance and necessity rather than by purpose. In 
these respects his philosophy was more scientific than those of 
Parmenides, Plato, and Aristotle. In other respects, it is true, he 
acquiesced in current superstitions; but in this he was no worse 
than many more recent men of science. 

1 It does not appear who "they" are, but one may assume that they are 
those who have preserved purity. 



Chapter VII 
ATHENS IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

E 1 1HE greatness of Athens begins at the time of the two 
I Persian wars (490 B.C. and 480-79 B.C.). Before that time, 

JL Ionia and Magna Graecia (the Greek cities of south Italy 
and Sicily) produced the great men. The victory of Athens against 
the Persian king Darius at Marathon (490), and of the combined 
Greek fleets against his son and successor Xerxes (480) under 
Athenian leadership, gave Athens great prestige. The lonians in 
the islands and on part of the mainland of Asia Minor had rebelled 
against Persia, and their liberation was effected by Athens after 
the Persians had been driven from the mainland of Greece. In 
this operation the Spartans, who cared only about their own 
territory, took no part. Thus Athens became the predominant 
partner in an alliance against Persia. By the constitution of the 
alliance, any constituent State was bound to contribute either a 
specified number of ships, or the cost of them. Most chose the 
latter, and thus Athens acquired naval supremacy over the other 
allies, and gradually transformed the alliance into an Athenian 
Empire. Athens became rich, and prospered under the wise 
leadership of Pericles, who governed, by the free choice of the 
citizens, for about thirty years, until his fall in 430 B.C. 

The age of Pericles was the happiest and most glorious time in 
the history of Athens. Aeschylus, who had fought in the Persian 
wars, inaugurated Greek tragedy; one of his tragedies, the Persae, 
departing from the custom of choosing Homeric subjects, deals 
with the defeat of Xerxes. He was quickly followed by Sophocles, 
and Sophocles by Euripides. Both extend into the dark days of the 
Peloponnesian War that followed the fall and death of Pericles* 
and Euripides reflects in his plays the scepticism of the later 
period. His contemporary Aristophanes, the comic poet, makes 
fun of all isms from the standpoint of robust and limited common 
sense; more particularly, he holds up Socrates to obloauv as one 
who denies the existence of Zeus and dabbles in 
scientific mysteries. 

Athens had Mfen captured by Xerxes, ar 
Acropoli^ had been destroyed by fire. Peric 

77 



'' WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

their reconstruction. The Parthenon and the other temples whose 
ruins remain to impress our age were built by him. Pheidias the 
sculptor was employed by the State to make colossal statues of 
gods and goddesses. At the end of this period, Athens was the 
most beautiful and splendid city of the Hellenic world. 

Herodotus, the father of history, was a native of Halicarnassus, 
in Asia Minor, but lived in Athens, was encouraged by the 
Athenian State, and wrote his account of the Persian wars from 
the Athenian point of view. 

The achievements of Athens in the time of Pericles are perhaps 
the most astonishing thing in all history. Until that time, Athens 
had lagged behind many other Greek cities ; neither in art nor in 
literature had it produced any great man (except Solon, who was 
primarily a lawgiver). Suddenly, under the stimulus of victory 
and wealth and the need of reconstruction, architects, sculptors, 
and dramatists, who remain unsurpassed to the present day, pro- 
duced works which dominated the future down to modern times. 
This is the more surprising when we consider the smallness of 
the population involved. Athens at its maximum, about 430 B.C., 
is estimated to have numbered about 230,000 (including slaves), 
and the surrounding territory of rural Attica probably contained 
a rather smaller population. Never before or since has anything 
approaching the same proportion of the inhabitants of any area 
shown itself capable of work of the highest excellence. 

In philosophy, Athens contributes only two great names, 
Socrates and Plato. Plato belongs to a somewhat later period, but 
Socrates passed his youth and early manhood under Pericles. The 
Athenians were sufficiently interested in philosophy to listen 
eagerly to teachers from other cities. The Sophists were sought 
after by young men who wished to torn the art of disputation; 
in the Protagoras, the Platonic Socrates gives an amusing satirical 
description of the ardent disciple** hanging on the words of the 
eminent visitor. Pericles, as we shall see, imported Anaxagoras, 
from whom Socrates professed to have learned the pre-eminence 
of mind in creation. 

Most of Plato's dialogues are supposed by him to take place 
during the time of Pericles, and they give an agreeable picture of 
life among the rich. Plato belonged to an aristocratic Athenian 
family, and grew up in the tradition of the perioil before war and 
democracy had destroyed the wealth and security of the upper 

78 



ATHENS IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

classes. His young men, who have no need to work, spend most 
of their leisure in the pursuit of science and mathematics and 
philosophy; they know Homer almost by heart, and are critical 
judges of the merits of professional reciters of poetry. The art 
of deductive reasoning had been lately discovered, and afforded 
the excitement of new theories, both true and false, over the whole 
field of knowledge. It was possible in that age, as in few others, 
to be both intelligent and happy, and happy through intelligence. 

But the balance of forces which produced this golden age was 
precarious. It was threatened both from within and from without 
from within by the democracy, and from without by Sparta. 
To understand what happened after Pericles, we must consider 
briefly the earlier history of Attica. 

Attica, at the beginning of the historical period, was a self- 
supporting little agricultural region; Athens, its capital, was not 
large, but contained a growing population of artisans and skilled 
artificers who desired to dispose of their produce abroad. Gradually 
it was found more profitable to cultivate vines and olives rather 
than grain, and to import grain, chiefly from the coast of the 
Black Sea. This form of cultivation required more capital than 
the cultivation of grain, and the small farmers got into debt. 
Attica, like other Greek states, had been a monarchy in the 
Homeric age, but the king became a merely religious official 
without political power. The government fell into the hands of 
the aristocracy, who oppressed both the country farmers and the 
urban artisans. A compromise in the direction of democracy was 
effected by Solon early in the sixth century, and much of his work 
survived through a subsequent period of tyranny under Peisistratus 
and his sons. When this period came to an end, the aristocrats, 
as the opponents of tyranny, were able to recommend themselves 
to the democracy. Until the fall of Pericles, democratic processes 
gave power to the aristocracy, as in nineteenth-century England. 
But towards the end of his life the leaders of the Athenian demo- 
cracy began to demand a larger share of political power. At the 
same time, his imperialist policy, with which the economic pros- 
perity of Athens was bound up, caused increasing friction with 
Sparta, leading at last to the Peloponnesian War (431-404), in 
which Athens was completely defeated. 

In spile of political collapse, the prestige of Athens survived, 

and throughout almost a millennium philosophy was centred there. 



79 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Alexandria eclipsed Athens in mathematics and science, but Plato 
and Aristotle had made Athens philosophically supreme. The 
Academy, where Plato had taught, survived all other schools, and 
persisted, as an island of paganism, for two centuries after the 
conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity. At last, in 
A.D. 529, it was closed by Justinian because of his religious bigotry, 
and the Dark Ages descended upon Europe. 



80 



Chapter VIII 
ANAXAGORAS 

P | IHE philosopher Anaxagoras, though not the equal of 

I Pythagoras, Heraclitus, or Parmenides, has nevertheless 

JL a considerable historical importance. He was an Ionian, 

and carried on the scientific, rationalist tradition of Ionia. He was 

the first to introduce philosophy to the Athenians, and the first 

to suggest mind as the primary cause of physical changes. 

He was born at Clazomenae, in Ionia, about the year 500 B.C., 
but he spent about thirty years of his life in Athens, approximately 
from 462 to 432 B.C. He was probably induced to come by Pericles, 
who was bent on civilizing his fellow-townsmen. Perhaps Aspasia, 
who came from Miletus, introduced him to Pericles. Plato, in the 
Phaedrus, says : 

Pericles "fell in, it seems with Anaxagoras, who was a scientific 
man ; and satiating himself with the theory of things on high, and 
having attained to a knowledge of the true nature of intellect and 
folly, which were just what the discourses of Anaxagoras were 
mainly about, he drew from that source whatever was of a nature 
to further him in the art of speech." 

It is said that Anaxagoras also influenced Euripides, but this 
is more doubtful. 

'l*hc citizens of Athens, like those of other cities in other ages 
and continents, showed a certain hostility to those who attempted 
to introduce a higher level of culture than that to which they were 
accustomed. When Pericles was growing old, his opponents began 
a campaign against him by attacking his friends. They accused 
Phcidias of embezzling some of the gold that was to be employed 
on his statues. They passed a law permitting impeachment of 
those who did not practise religion and taught theories about "the 
things on high." Under this law, they prosecuted Anaxagoras, 
who was accused of teaching that the sun was a red-hot stone 
and the moon was earth. (The same accusation was repeated by 
the prosecutors of Socrates, who made fun of them for being out 
of date.) What happened is not certain, except that Anaxagoras 
had to leave Athens. It seems probable that Pericles got him out 

81 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of prison and managed to get him away. He returned to Ionia, 
where he founded a school. In accordance with his will, the 
anniversary of his death was kept as a schoolchildren 's holiday. 

Anaxagoras held that everything is infinitely divisible, and that 
even the smallest portion of matter contains some of each element. 
Things appear to be that of which they contain most. Thus, for 
example, everything contains some fire, but we only call it fire if 
that element preponderates. Like Empedocles, he argues against 
the void, saying that the clepsydra or an inflated skin shows that 
there is air where there seems to be nothing. 

He differed from his predecessors in regarding mind (nous) as a 
substance which enters into the composition of living things, and 
distinguishes them from dead matter. In everything, he says, there 
is a portion of everything except mind, and some things contain 
mind also. Mind has power over all things that have life; it is 
infinite and self-ruled, and is mixed with nothing. Except as 
regards mind, everything, however small, contains portions of all 
opposites, such as hot and cold, white and black. He maintained 
that snow is black (in pan). 

Mind is the source of all motion. It causes a rotation, which is 
gradually spreading throughout the world, and is causing the 
lightest things to go to the circumference, and the heaviest to fall 
towards the centre. Mind is uniform, and is just as good in animals 
as in man. Man's apparent superiority is due to the fact that he 
has hands; all seeming differences of intelligence are really due 
to bodily differences. 

Both Aristotle and the Platonic Socrates complain that Anaxa- 
goras, after introducing mind, makes very little use of it. Aristotle 
points out that he only introduces mind as a cause when he knows 
no other. Whenever he can, he gives a mechanical explanation. 
He rejected necessity and chance as giving the origins of things ; 
nevertheless, there was no "Providence" in his cosmology. He does 
not seem to have thought much about ethics or religion ; probably 
he was an atheist, as his prosecutors maintained. All his pre- 
decessors influenced him, except Pythagoras. The influence of 
Parmenides was the same in his case as in that of Empedocles. 

In science he had great merit. It was he who first explained that 
the moon shines by reflected light, though there is a cryptic frag- 
ment in Parmenides suggesting that he also knew this. Anaxagoras 
gave the correct theory of eclipses, and knew that the moon is 

82 



ANAXAGORAS 

below the sun. The suri and stars, he said, are fiery stones, but we 
do not feel the heat of the stars because they are too distant. The 
sun is larger than the Peloponnesus. The moon has mountains, 
and (he thought) inhabitants. 

Anaxagoras is said to have been of the school of Anaximenes ; 
certainly he kept alive the rationalist and scientific tradition of the 
lonians. One does not find in him the ethical and religious pre- 
occupations which, passing from the Pythagoreans to Socrates 
and from Socrates to Plato, brought an obscurantist bias into 
Greek philosophy. He is not quite in the first rank, but he is 
important as the first to bring philosophy to Athens, and as one 
of the influences that helped to form Socrates. 



Chapter IX 
THE ATOMISTS 

} IHE founders of atomism were two, Leucippus and Demo- 

I critus. It is difficult to disentangle them, because they are 

JL generally mentioned together, and apparently some of the 

works of Leucippus were subsequently attributed to Democritus. 

Leucippus, who seems to have flourished about 440 B.C., 1 came 

from Miletus, and carried on the scientific rationalist philosophy 

associated with that city. He was much influenced by Parmenides 

and Zeno. So little is known of him that Epicurus (a later follower 

of Democritus) was thought to have denied his existence altogether, 

and some moderns have revived this theory. There are, however, 

a number of allusions to him in Aristotle, and it seems incredible 

that these (which include textual quotations) would have occurred 

if he had been merely a myth. 

Democritus is a much more definite figure. He was a native of 
Abdera in Thrace; as for his date, he stated that he was young 
when Anaxagoras was old, say about 432 B.C., and he is taken to 
have flourished about 420 B.C. He travelled widely in southern 
and eastern lands in search of knowledge ; he perhaps spent a con- 
siderable time in Egypt, and he certainly visited Persia. He then 
returned to Abdera, where he remained. Zeller calls him "superior 
to all earlier and contemporary philosophers in wealth of know- 
ledge, and to most in acuteness and logical correctness of thinking." 
Democritus was a contemporary of Socrates and the Sophists, 
and should, on purely chronological grounds, be treated some- 
what later in our history. The difficulty is that he is so hard to 
separate from Leucippus. On this ground, I am considering him 
before Socrates and the Sophists, although part of his philosophy 
was intended as an answer to Protagoras, his fellow-townsman 
and the most eminent of the Sophists. Protagoras, when he visited 
Athens, was received enthusiastically; Democritus, on the other 
hand, says: "I went to Athens, and no one knew me." For a long 
time, his philosophy was ignored in Athens; "It is not clear," says 
Burnet, "that Plato knew anything about Democritus Aristotle, 

1 Cyril Bailey, The Greek Atomitt* and Epicurus, estimates that he 
flourished about 430 B.C. or a link earlier. 

84 



THE ATOMISTS 

on the other hand, knows Democritus well; for he too was an 
Ionian from the North." 1 Plato never mentions him in the Dia- 
logues, but is said by Diogenes Laertius to have disliked him so 
much that he wished all his books burnt. Heath esteems him 
highly as a mathematician. 2 

The fundamental ideas of the common philosophy of Leucippus 
and Democritus were due to the former, but as regards the 
working out it is hardly possible to disentangle them, nor is it, 
for our purposes, important to make the attempt. Leucippus, 
if not Democritus, was led to atomism in the attempt to mediate 
between monism and pluralism, as represented by Parmenides 
and Empedocles respectively. Their point of view was remark- 
ably like that of modern science, and avoided most of the faults 
to which Greek speculation was prone. They believed that 
everything is composed of atoms, which are physically, but 
not geometrically, indivisible; that between the atoms there is 
empty space; that atoms are indestructible; that they always have 
been, and always will be, in motion; that there are an infinite 
number of atoms, and even of kinds of atoms, the differences being 
as regards shape and size. Aristotle 3 asserts that, according to the 
atomists, atoms also differ as regards heat, the spherical atoms, 
which compose fire, being the hottest; and as regards weight, he 
quotes Democritus as saying "The more any indivisible exceeds, 
the heavier it is." But the question whether atoms are originally 
possessed of weight in the theories of the atomists is a controversial 
one. 

The atoms were always in motion, but there is disagreement 
among commentators as to the character of the original motion. 
Some, especially Zeller, hold that the atoms were thought to be 
always falling, and that the heavier ones fell faster; they thus 
caught up the lighter ones, there were impacts, and the atoms 
were deflected like billiard balls. This was certainly the view of 
Epicurus, who in most respects based his theories on those of 
Democritus, while trying, rather unintelligently, to take account 
of Aristotle's criticisms. But there is considerable reason to think 
that weight was not an original property of the atoms of Leucippus 
and Democritus. It seems more probable that, on their view, 
atoms were originally moving at random, as in the modern kinetic 

1 /'ram ThaUt to Plato, p. 193- f G* k Mathematics, Vol. I, p. 176. 
9 On Generation and Corruption, 316*. 

85 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

theory of gases. Democritus said there was neither up nor down 
in the infinite void, and compared the movement of atoms in the 
soul to that of motes in a sunbeam when there is no wind. This is 
a much more intelligent view than that of Epicurus, and I think 
we may assume it to have been that of Leucippus and Democritus. 1 

As a result of collisions, collections of atoms came to form 
vortices. The rest proceeded much as in Anaxagoras, but it was 
an advance to explain the vortices mechanically rather than as 
due to the action of mind. 

It was common in antiquity to reproach the atomists with attri- 
buting everything to chance. They were, on the contrary, strict 
determinists, who believed that everything happens in accordance 
with natural laws. Democritus explicitly denied that anything can 
happen by chance. 8 Leucippus, though his existence is questioned, 
is known to have said one thing: "Naught happens for nothing, 
but everything from a ground and of necessity/' It is true that 
he gave no reason why the world should originally have been as 
it was; this, perhaps, might have been attributed to chance*. Hut 
when once the world existed, its further development was un- 
alterably fixed by mechanical principles. -Aristotle and others 
reproached him and Democritus for not accounting for the 
original motion of the atoms, but in thi* the atomists were more 
scientific than their critics. Causation must start from something, 
and wherever it starts no cause can be assigned for the initial 
datum. The world may be attributed to a Creator, but even then 
the Creator Himself is unaccounted for. The theory of the atomists, 
in fact, was more nearly that of modern science than any other 
theory propounded in antiquity. 

The atomists, unlike Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, sought to 
explain the world without introducing the notion of purpose or 
Jmal cause. The "final cause" of an occurrence is an event in the 
future for the sake of which the occurrence takes place. In human 
affairs, this conception is applicable. Why does the baker make 
bread? Because people will be hungry. Why are railways built? 
Because people will wish to travel In such cases, things are ex- 
plained by the purpose they serve. When we ask "why?" con- 
cerning an event, we may mean either of two things. We may 

1 This interpretation is adopted by Bumct, and alsfy at leant as regard* 
Leucippus, by Uaiiey (op. nV., p. 83). 
* See Bailey, op. a/., p. 121, on the detenniruttn of Uetnocqtu*. 

86 



THE ATOMIST8 

mean: "What purpose did this event serve?" or we may mean: 
"What earlier circumstances caused this event?" The answer to 
the former question is a teleological explanation, or an explanation 
by final causes ; the answer to the latter question is a mechanistic 
explanation. I do not see how it could have been known in advance 
which of these two questions science ought to ask, or whether it 
ought to ask both. But experience has shown that the mechanistic 
question leads to scientific knowledge, while the teleological 
question does not. The atomists asked the mechanistic question, 
and gave a mechanistic answer. Their successors, until the Re- 
naissance, were more interested in the teleological question, and 
thus led science up a blind alley. 

In regard to both questions alike, there is a limitation which is 
often ignored, both in popular thought and in philosophy. Neither 
question can be asked intelligibly about reality as a whole (including 
God), but only about parts of it. As regards the teleological 
explanation, it usually arrives, before long, at a Creator, or at least 
an Artificer, whose purposes are realized in the course of nature. 
But if a man is so obstinately teleological as to continue to ask 
what purpose is served by the Creator, it becomes obvious that 
his question is impious. It is, moreover, unmeaning, since, to 
make it significant, we should have to suppose the Creator created 
by some super-Creator whose purposes He served. The conception 
of purpose, therefore, is only applicable within reality, not to 
reality as a whole. 

A not dissimilar argument applies to mechanistic explanations. 
One event is caused by another, the other by a third, and so on. 
But if we ask for a cause of the whole, we are driven again to the 
Creator, who must Himself be uncaused. All causal explanations, 
therefore must have an arbitrary beginning. That is why it is no 
defect in the theory of the atomists to have left the original move- 
ments of the atoms unaccounted for. 

It must not be supposed that their reasons for their theories 
were wholly empirical. The atomic theory was revived in modern 
times to explain the facts of chemistry, but these facts were not 
known to the Greeks. There was no very sharp distinction, in 
ancient times, between empirical observation and logical argu- 
ment. Parmcnides, it is true, treated observed facts with contempt, 
but Empedocles*and Anaxagoras would combine much of their 
metaphysics with observations on water-clocks and whirling 

87 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

buckets. Until the Sophists, no philosopher seems to have doubted 
that a complete metaphysic and cosmology could be established 
by a combination of much reasoning and some observation. By 
good luck, the atomists hit on a hypothesis for which, more than 
two thousand years later, some evidence was found, but their 
belief, in their day, was none the less destitute of any solid 
foundation. 1 

Like the other philosophers of his time, Leucippus was con- 
cerned to find a way of reconciling the arguments of Parmenides 
with the obvious fact of motion and change. As Aristotle says: 2 

" Although these opinions [those of Parmenides] appear to follow 
logically in a dialectical discussion, yet to believe them seems 
next door to madness when one considers the facts. For indeed no 
lunatic seems to be so far out of his senses as to suppose that fire 
and ice are "one": it is only between what is right and what seems 
right from habit that some people are mad enough to see no 
difference." 

Leucippus, however, thought he had a theory which harmonized 
with sense-perception and would not abolish either coming-to-be 
and passing-away or motion and the multiplicity of things. He 
made these concessions to the facts of perception: on the other 
hand, he conceded to the Monists that there could be no motion 
without a void. The result is a theory which he states as follows : 
"The void is a not-being, and no part of what is is a not-being; for 
what is in the strict sense of the term is an absolute plenum. This 
plenum, however, is not one; on the contrary, it is a many infinite 
in number and invisible owing to the minuteness of their bulk. The 
many move in the void (for there is a void): and by coming to- 
gether they produce coming-to-be, while by separating they pro- 
duce passing-away. Moreover, they act and suffer action whenever 
they chance to be in contact (for there they are not one), and they 
generate by being put together and become intertwined. From 
the genuinely one, on the other hand, there could never have come 
to be a multiplicity, nor from the genuinely many a one: that is 
impossible." 

It will be seen that there was one point on which even-body 50 
far was agreed, namely that there could be no motion in a plenum. 

1 On the logical and mathematical grounds for the theories of the 
tomists, tee Gaston Mtthaud, Let Phifaiophn Gfometw de la Greet, 
chap. sv. 

* On Generation and Corruption, 325*. 

88 



THE ATOMISTS 

In this, all alike were mistaken. There can be cyclic motion in a 
plenum, provided it has always existed. The idea was that a thing 
could only move into an empty place, and that, in a plenum, there 
are no empty places. It might be contended, perhaps validly, that 
motion could never begin in a plenum, but it cannot be validly 
maintained that it could not occur at all. To the Greeks, however, 
it seemed that one must either acquiesce in the unchanging world 
of Parmcnides, or admit the void. 

Now the arguments of Parmenides against not-being seemed 
logically irrefutable against the void, and they were reinforced by 
the discovery that where there seems to be nothing there is air. 
(This is an example of the confused mixture of logic and observa- 
tion that was common.) We may put the Parmenidean position 
in this way: "You say there is the void; therefore the void is not 
nothing; therefore it is not the void." It cannot be said that the 
atomists answered this argument; they merely proclaimed that 
they proposed to ignore it, on the ground that motion is a fact of 
experience, and therefore there must be a void, however difficult 
it may be to conceive. 1 

Let us consider the subsequent history of this problem. The 
first and most obvious way of avoiding the logical difficulty is to 
distinguish between matter and space. According to this view, 
space is not nothing, but is of the nature of a receptacle, which 
may or may not have any given part filled with matter. Aristotle 
says (Physics, 208 b): 'The theory that the void exists involves 
the existence of place: for one would define void as place bereft 
of body/' This view is set forth with the utmost explicitness by 
Newton, who asserts the existence of absolute space, and accor- 
dingly distinguishes absolute from relative motion. In the 
C'opernican controversy, both sides (however little they may 
have realized it) were committed to this view, since they thought 
there was a difference between saying "the heavens revolve from 
cast to west" and saying "the earth rotates from west to east/' 
If all motion is relative, these two statements are merely different 

1 Bailey (op. /., p. 75) maintains, on the contrary, that Leucippus had 
an answer, which was "extremely subtle." It consisted essentially in 
admitting the existence of something (the void) which was not corporeal. 
Similarly Burnet sa>; "It is a curious fact that the Atomists, who are 
commonly regarded as the great materialists of antiquity, were actually 
the first to wy distinctly that a thing might be real without being a body." 

89 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

ways of saying the same thing, like "John is the father of James" 
and "James is the son of John." But if all motion is relative, and 
space is not substantial, we are left with the Parmenidean argu- 
ments against the void on our hands. 

Descartes, whose arguments are of just the same sort as those 
of early Greek philosophers, said that extension is the essence of 
matter, and therefore there is matter everywhere. For him, 
extension is an adjective, not a substantive; its substantive is 
matter, and without its substantive it cannot exist. Empty space, 
to him, is as absurd as happiness without a sentient being who is 
happy. Leibniz, on somewhat different grounds, also believed in 
the plenum, but he maintained that space is merely a system of 
relations. On this subject there was a famous controversy between 
him and Newton, the latter represented by Clarke. The con- 
troversy remained undecided until the time of Einstein, whose 
theory conclusively gave the victory to Leibniz. 

The modern physicist, while he still believes that matter is in 
some sense atomic, does not believe in empty space. Where there 
is not matter, there is still something, notably light-waves. Matter 
no longer has the lofty status that it acquired in philosophy through 
the arguments of Parmenides. It is not unchanging substance, but 
merely a way of grouping events. Some events belong to groups 
that can be regarded as material things; others, such as light- 
waves, do not. It is the events that are the stuff of the world, and 
each of them is of brief duration. In this respect, modern physics 
is on the side of Heraclitus as against Parmenides. But it was on 
the side of Parmenides until Einstein and quantum theory. 

As regards space, the modern view is that it is neither a sub- 
stance, as Newton maintained, and as Leucippus and Democritus 
ought to have said, nor an adjective of extended bodies, as Des- 
cartes thought, but a system of relations, as Leibniz held. It is 
not by any means clear whether this view is compatible with the 
existence of the void. Perhaps, as a matter of abstract logic, it can 
be reconciled with the void. We might say that, between any two 
things, there is a certain greater or smaller distance, and that 
distance does not imply the existence of intermediate things. 
Such a point of view, however, would be impossible to utilize 
in modern physics. Since Einstein, distance ^is between events, 
not between things, and involves time as well as space. It is 
essentially a causal conception, and in modern physra there is 



THE ATOMI3TB 

no action at a distance. All this, however, is based upon empirical 
rather than logical grounds. Moreover the modern view cannot be 
stated except in terms of differential equations, and would therefore 
be unintelligible to the philosophers of antiquity. 

It would seem, accordingly, that the logical development of the 
views of the atomists is the Newtonian theory of absolute space, 
which meets the difficulty of attributing reality to not-being. To 
this theory there are no logical objections. The chief objection is 
that absolute space is absolutely unknowable, and cannot therefore 
be a necessary hypothesis in an empirical science. The more 
practical objection is that physics can get on without it. But the 
world of the atomists remains logically possible, and is more akin 
to the actual world than is the world of any other of the ancient 
philosophers. 

Democritus worked out his theories in considerable detail, and 
some of the working-out is interesting. Each atom, he said, was 
impenetrable and indivisible because it contained no void. When 
you use a knife to cut an apple, the knife has to find empty places 
where it can penetrate ; if the apple contained no void, it would 
be infinitely hard and therefore physically indivisible. Each atom 
is internally unchanging, and in fact a Parmenidean One. The only 
things that atoms do are to move and hit each other, and some- 
times to combine when they happen to have shapes that are 
capable of interlocking. They are of all sorts of shapes; fire is 
composed of small spherical atoms, and so is the soul. Atoms, by 
collision, produce vortices, which generate bodies and ultimately 
worlds. 1 There are many worlds, some growing, some decaying; 
some may have no sun or moon, some several. Every world has a 
Ixrtfinning and an end. A world may be destroyed by collision 
with a larger world. This cosmology may be summarized in 
Shelley's words: 

Worlds on worlds are rolling ever 

From creation to decay, 
Like the bubbles on a river 

Sparkling bursting, borne away. 

Life developed out of the primeval slime. There is some fire every- 
where in a living body, but most in the brain or in the breast. (On 

1 On the way in wfiich this was supposed to happen, sec Bailey, op. '!., 
p. 138 ff. 

9 1 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

this, authorities differ.) Thought is a kind of motion, and is thus 
able to cause motion elsewhere. Perception and thought are phy- 
sical processes. Perception is of two sorts, one of the senses, one 
of the understanding. Perceptions of the latter sort depend only 
on the things perceived, while those of the former sort depend 
also on our senses, and are therefore apt to be deceptive. Like 
Locke, Democritus held that such qualities as warmth, taste, and 
colour are not really in the object, but are due to our sense-organs, 
while such qualities as weight, density, and hardness are really in 
the object. 

Democritus was a thorough-going materialist; for him, as we 
have seen, the soul was composed of atoms, and thought was a 
physical process. There was no purpose in the universe; there 
were only atoms governed by mechanical laws. He disbelieved in 
popular religion, and he argued against the nous of Anaxagoras. 
In ethics he considered cheerfulness the goal of life, and regarded 
moderation and culture as the best means to it. He disliked every- 
thing violent and passionate; he disapproved of sex, because, he 
said, it involved the overwhelming of consciousness by pleasure. 
He valued friendship, but thought ill of women, and did not desire 
children, because their education interferes with philosophy. In 
all this, he was very like Jeremy Bentham ; he was equally so in 
his love of what the Greeks called democracy. 1 

Democritus such, at least, is my opinion is the last of the 
Greek philosophers to be free from a certain fault which vitiated 
all later ancient and medieval thought. All the philosophers we 
have been considering so far were engaged in a disinterested effort 
to understand the world. They thought it easier to understand 
than it is, but without this optimism they would not have had the 
courage to make a beginning. Their attitude, in the main, was 
genuinely scientific whenever it did not merely embody the pre- 
judices of their age. But it was not only scientific ; it was imaginative 
and vigorous and filled with the delight of adventure. They were 
interested in everything meteors and eclipses, fishes and whirl- 
winds, religion and morality; with a penetrating intellect they 
combined the zest of children. 

From this point onwards, there are first certain seeds of decay, 
in spite of previously unmatched achievement, and then a gradual 

1 "Poverty in a democracy t* much to be preferred to what is called 
prosperity under despots * freedom is to slavery/' he tayt. 

9* 



THE ATOMIBT8 

decadence. What is amiss, even in the best philosophy after Demo- 
critus, is an undue emphasis on man as compared with the universe. 
First comes scepticism, with the Sophists, leading to a study of 
how we know rather than to the attempt to acquire fresh knowledge. 
Then comes, with Socrates, the emphasis on ethics; with Plato, 
the rejection of the world of sense in favour of the self-created 
world of pure thought; with Aristotle, the belief in purpose as 
the fundamental concept in science. In spite of the genius of Plato 
and Aristotle, their thought has vices which proved infinitely 
harmful. After their time, there was a decay of vigour, and a 
gradual recrudescence of popular superstition. A partially new 
outlook arose as a result of the victory of Catholic orthodoxy; but 
it was not until the Renaissance that philosophy regained the 
vigour and independence that characterize the predecessors of 
Socrates. 



Chapter X 
PROTAGORAS 

E IHE great pre-Socratic systems that we have been consider- 
I ing were confronted, in the latter half of the fifth century, 
JL by a sceptical movement, in which the most important 
figure was Protagoras, chief of the Sophists. The word "Sophist" 
had originally no bad connotation; it meant, as nearly as may be, 
what we mean by "professor." A Sophist was a man who made 
his living by teaching young men certain things that, it was 
thought, would be useful to them in practical life. As there was 
no public provision for such education, the Sophists taught only 
those who had private means, or whose parents had. This tended 
to give them a certain class bias, which was increased by the 
political circumstances of the time. In Athens and many other 
cities, democracy was politically triumphant, but nothing had 
been done to diminish the wealth of those who belonged to the 
old aristocratic families. It was, in the main, the rich who em- 
bodied what appears to us as Hellenic culture: they had education 
and leisure, travel had taken the edge off their traditional pre- 
judices, and the time that they spent in discussion sharpened their 
wits. What was called democracy did not touch the institution of 
slavery, which enabled the rich to enjoy their wealth without 
oppressing free citizens. 

In many cities, however, and especially in Athens, the poorer 
citizens had towards the rich a double hostility, that of envy, and 
that of traditionalism. The rich were supposed often with justice 
to be impious and immoral; they were subverting ancient 
beliefs, and probably trying to destroy democracy'. It thus hap- 
pened that political democracy, was associated with cultural 
conservatism, while those who were cultural innovators tended to 
be political reactionaries. Somewhat the same situation exists in 
modern America, where Tammany, as a mainly Catholic organiza- 
tion, is engaged in defending traditional theological and ethical 
dogmas against the assaults of enlightenment. But the enlightened 
are politically weaker in America than they were in Athens, 
because they have failed to make common cav*e with the pluto- 
cracy. There is, however, one important and highly intellectual 

94 



PROTAGORAS 

class which is concerned with the defence of the plutocracy, 
namely the class of corporation lawyers. In same respects, their 
functions are similar to those that were performed in Athens by 
the Sophists. 

Athenian democracy, though it had the grave limitation of not 
including slaves or women, was in some respects more democratic 
than any modern system. Judges and most executive officers were 
chosen by lot, and served for short periods; they were thus average 
citizens, like our jurymen, with the prejudices and lack of pro- 
fessionalism characteristic of average citizens. In general, there 
were a large number of judges to hear each case. The plaintiff 
and defendant, or prosecutor and accused, appeared in person, 
not through professional lawyers. Naturally, success or failure 
depended largely on oratorical skill in appealing to popular pre- 
judices. Although a man had to deliver his own speech, he could 
hire an expert to write the speech for him, or, as many preferred, 
he could pay for instruction in the arts required for success in the 
law courts. These arts the Sophists were supposed to teach. 

The aye of Pericles is analogous, in Athenian history, to the 
Victorian age in the history of England. Athens was rich and 
powerful, not much troubled by wars, and possessed of a demo- 
cratic constitution administered by aristocrats. As we have seen, 
in connection with Anaxagoras, a democratic opposition to 
Pericles gradually gathered strength, and attacked his friends one 
by one. The Pcloponnesian War broke out in 43 1 B.C. ; J Athens 
(in common with many other places) was ravaged by the plague; 
the population, which had been about 230,000, was greatly 
reduced, and never rose again to its former level (Bury, History of 
Greece, I, p. 444). Pericles himself, in 430 B.C., was deposed from 
the office of general and fined for misappropriation of public 
money, but soon reinstated. His two legitimate sons died 
of the plague, and he himself died in the following year (429). 
Pheidias and Anaxagoras were condemned; Aspasia was prose- 
cuted for impiety and for keeping a disorderly house, but 
acquitted. 

In such a community, it was natural that men who were likely 
to incur the hostility of democratic politicians should wish to 
acquire forensic skill. For Athens, though much addicted to per- 
secution, was in one respect less illiberal than modern America, 
1 It ended in 404 ii.C. with the complete overthrow of Athens. 

95 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

since those accused of impiety and corrupting the young were 
allowed to plead in their own defence. 

This explains the popularity of the Sophists with one class and 
their unpopularity with another. But in their own minds they 
served more impersonal purposes, and it is clear that many of 
them were genuinely concerned with philosophy. Plato devoted 
himself to caricaturing and vilifying them, but they must not be 
judged by his polemics. In his lighter vein, take the following 
passage from the Eutkydemus, in which two Sophists, Dionyso- 
dorus and Euthydemus, set to work to puzzle a simple-minded 
person named Clesippus. Dionysodorus begins: 

You say that you have a dog ? 

Yes, a villain of a one, said Clesippus. 

And he has puppies ? 

Yes, and they are very like himself. 

And the dog is the father of them ? 

Yes, he said, I certainly saw him and the mother of the 

puppies come together. 
And is he not yours ? 
To be sure he is. 
Then he is a father, and he is yours; ergo, he is your 

father, and the puppies are your brothers. 

In a more serious vein, take the dialogue called The Sophist. 
This is a logical discussion of definition, which uses the sophist 
as an illustration. With its logic we are not at present concerned ; 
the only thing I wish to mention at the moment as regards this 
dialogue is the final conclusion : 

"The ait of contradiction-making, descended from an insincere 
kind of conceited mimicry, of the semblance- making breed, 
derived from image-making, distinguished as a portion, not divine 
but human, of production, that presents a shadow-play of words 
such is the blood and lineage which can, with perfect truth, be 
assigned to the authentic Sophist/' (Corn ford's translation.) 

There is a story about Protagoras, no doubt apocryphal, which 
illustrates the connection of the Sophists with the law-courts in 
the popular mind. It is said that he taught a young man on the 
terms that he should be paid his fee if the young man won 
his first law-suit, but not otherwise, and that the young man's 
first law-suit was one brought by Protagoras for recovery of 
his fee. 

96 



PROTAGORAS 

However, it is time to leave these preliminaries and see what is 
really known about Protagoras. 

Protagoras was born about 500 B.C., at Abdera, the city from 
which Democritus came. He twice visited Athens, his second visit 
being not later than 432 B.C. He made a code of laws for the city 
of Thurii in 444-3 B.C. There is a tradition that he was prosecuted 
for impiety, but this seems to be untrue, in spite of the fact that 
he wrote a book On the Gods, which began: "With regard to the 
gods, I cannot feel sure either that they are or that they are not, 
nor what they are like in figure; for there are many things that 
hinder sure knowledge, the obscurity of the subject and the 
shortness of human life." 

His second visit to Athens is described somewhat satirically in 
Plato's Protagoras, and his doctrines are discussed seriously in 
the Theaetetus. He is chiefly noted for his doctrine that "Man is 
the measure of all things, of things that are that they are, and of 
things that are not that they are not." This is interpreted as 
meaning that each man is the measure of all things, and that, 
when men differ, there is no objective truth in virtue of which 
one is right and the other wrong. The doctrine is essentially 
sceptical, and is presumably based on the "deceitfulness" of the 
senses. 

One of the three founders of pragmatism, F. C. S. Schiller, was 
in the halm of calling himself a disciple of Protagoras. This was, 
I think, because Plato, in the Thcaetetus, suggests, as an interpre- 
tation of Protagoras, that one opinion can be better than another, 
though it cannot be truer. For example, when a man has jaundice 
everything looks yellow. There is no sense in saying that things 
are really not yellow, but the colour they look to a man in health; 
we can say, however, that, since health is better than sickness, 
the opinion of the man in health is better than that of the man 
who has jaundice. This point of view, obviously, is akin to 
pragmatism. 

The disbelief in objective truth makes the majority, for practical 
puqxiscs, the arbiters as to what to believe. Hence Protagoras was 
led to a defence of law and convention and traditional morality. 
While, as we saw, he did not know whether the gods existed, he 
was sure they ought to be worshipped. This point of view is 
obviously the right one for a man whose theoretical scepticism is 
thoroughgoing and logical. 

97 D 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Protagoras spent his adult life in a sort of perpetual lecture tour 
through the cities of Greece, teaching, for a fee, "any one who 
desired practical efficiency and higher mental culture" (Zeller, 
p. 1299). Plato objects somewhat snobbishly, according to modern 
notions to the Sophists' practice of charging money for instruc- 
tion. Plato himself had adequate private means, and was unable, 
apparently, to realize the necessities of those who had not his good 
fortune. It is odd that modern professors, who see no reason to 
refuse a salary, have so frequently repeated Plato's strictures. 

There was, however, another point in which the Sophists differed 
from most contemporary philosophers. It was usual, except among 
the Sophists, for a teacher to found a school, which had some of 
the properties of a brotherhood; there was a greater or smaller 
amount of common life, there was often something analogous to 
a monastic rule, and there was usually an esoteric doctrine not 
proclaimed to the public. All this was natural wherever philosophy 
had arisen out of Orphism. Among the Sophists there was none 
of this. What they had to teach was not, in their minds, connected 
with religion or virtue. They taught the art of arguing, and as 
much knowledge as would help in this an. Broadly speaking, they 
were prepared, like modern lawyers, to show how to ar^ue for 
or against any opinion, and were not concerned to advocate con- 
clusions of their own. Those to whom philosophy was a way of 
life, closely bound up with religion, were naturally shocked; to 
them, the Sophists appeared frivolous and immoral. 

To some extent though it is impossible to say how far the 
odium which the Sophists incurred, not only with the general 
public, but with Plato and subsequent philosophers, was due to 
their intellectual merit. The pursuit of truth, when it is whole- 
hearted, must ignore moral considerations; we cannot know in 
advance that the truth will turn out to be what is thought edifying 
in a given society. The Sophists were prepared to follow an argu- 
ment wherever it might lead them. Often it led them to scepticism. 
One of them, Gorgias, maintained that nothing exists; that if 
anything exists, it is unknowable; and granting it even to exist 
and la be knowable by any one man, he could never communicate 
it to others. We do not know what hLs arguments were, but I can 
well imagine that they had a logical force which compelled his 
opponents to take refuge in edification. Plato u? always concerned 
to advocate views that \\ill make people wliat he thinks virtuous; 

98 



PROTAGORAS 

he is hardly ever intellectually honest, because he allows himself 
to judge doctrines by their social consequences. Even about this, 
he is not honest; he pretends to follow the argument and to be 
judging by purely theoretical standards, when in fact he is twist- 
ing the discussion so as to lead to a virtuous result. He introduced 
this vice into philosophy, where it has persisted ever since. It 
was probably largely hostility to the Sophists that gave this, 
character to his dialogues. One of the defects of all philosophers 
since Plato is that their inquiries into ethics proceed on the 
assumption that they already know the conclusions to be reached. 

It seems that there were men, in the Athens of the late fifth 
century, who taught political doctrines which seemed immoral to 
their contemporaries, and seem so to the democratic nations of 
the present day. Thrasymachus, in the first book of the Republic, 
argues that there is no justice except the interest of the stronger; 
that laws are made by governments for their own advantage; and 
that there is no impersonal standard to which to appeal in contests 
for power, Callicles, according to Plato (in the Gorgtas), maintained 
a similar doctrine. The law of nature, he said, is the law of the 
stronger; but for convenience men have established institutions 
and moral precepts to restrain the strong. Such doctrines have 
won much wider assent in our day than they did in antiquity. 
And whatever may be thought of them, they are not characteristic 
of the Sophists. 

During the fifth century whatever part the Sophists may have 
had in the change- there was in Athens a transformation from a 
certain stiff Puritan simplicity to a quick-witted and rather cruel 
cynicism in conflict with a slow-witted and equally cruel defence 
of crumbling orthodoxy. At the beginning of the century comes 
the Athenian championship of the cities of Ionia against the 
Persians, and the victory of Marathon in 490 B.C. At the end 
comes the defeat of Athens by Sparta in 404 B.C., and the execu- 
tion of Socrates in 3^9 B.C. After this time Athens ceased to be 
politically important, but acquired undoubted cultural supremacy, 
which it retained until the victory of Christianity. 

Something of the history of fifth-century 
the understanding of Plato and of all subsec 
In the first Persian war, the chief glory 
owing to the decisfvc victor}' at Marathor 
years later^ the Athenians still were the 

99 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

but on land victory was mainly due to the Spartans, who were the 
acknowledged leaders of the Hellenic world. The Spartans, how- 
ever, were narrowly provincial in their outlook, and ceased to 
oppose the Persians when they had been chased out of European 
Greece. The championship of the Asiatic Greeks, and the libera- 
tion of the islands that had been conquered by the Persians, was 
undertaken, with great success, by Athens. Athens became the 
leading sea power, and acquired a considerable imperialist control 
over the Ionian islands. Under the leadership of Pericles, who was 
a moderate democrat and a moderate imperialist, Athens prospered. 
The great temples, whose ruins are still the glory of Athens, were 
built by his initiative, to replace those destroyed by Xerxes. The 
city increased very rapidly in wealth, and also in culture, and, as 
invariably happens at such times, particularly when wealth is due 
to foreign commerce, traditional morality and traditional beliefs 
decayed. 

There was at this time in Athens an extraordinarily large 
number of men of genius. The three great dramatists, Aeschylus, 
Sophocles, and Euripides, all belong to the fifth century. Aeschylus 
fought at Marathon and saw the battle of Salamis. Sophocles was 
still religiously orthodox. But Euripides was influenced by Prota- 
goras and by the free-thinking spirit of the time, and his treatment 
of the myths is sceptical and subversive. Aristophanes, the comic 
poet, made fun of Socrates, Sophists, and philosophers, but, 
nevertheless, belonged to their circle; in the Symposium Plato 
represents him as on very friendly terms with Socrates. Pheidias 
the sculptor, as we have seen, belonged to the circle of Pericles. 

The excellence of Athens, at this period, was artistic rather 
than intellectual. None of the great mathematicians or philosophers 
of the fifth century were Athenians, with the exception of Socrates ; 
and Socrates was not a writer, but a man who confined himself 
to oral discussion. 

The outbreak of the Pcloponncsian War in 431 B.C. and t he- 
death of Pericles in 429 B.C. introduced a darker period in Athenian 
history. The Athenians were superior at sea, but the Spartans 
had supremacy on land, and repeatedly occupied Attica (except 
Athens) during the summer. The result was that Athens was over- 
crowded, and suffered severely from the plague. In 414 B.C. the 
Athenians sent a large expedition to Sicily, in the hope of capturing 
Syracuse, which was aljied with Sparta; but the attempt was a 

100 



PROTAGORAS 

failure. War made the Athenians fierce and persecuting. In 416 B.C. 
they conquered the island of Melos, put to death all men of 
military age and enslaved the other inhabitants. The Trojan 
Women of Euripides is a protest against such barbarism. The 
conflict had an ideological aspect, since Sparta was the champion 
of oligarchy and Athens of democracy. The Athenians had reason 
to suspect some of their own aristocrats of treachery, which was 
generally thought to have had a part in the final naval defeat at 
the battle of Acgospotami in 405 B.C. 

At the end of the war, the Spartans established in Athens an 
oligarchical government, known as the Thirty Tyrants. Some of 
the Thirty, including Critias, their chief, had been pupils of 
Socrates. They were deservedly unpopular, and were overthrown 
within a year. With the compliance of Sparta, democracy was 
restored, but it was an embittered democracy, precluded by an 
amnesty from direct vengeance against its internal enemies, but 
glad of any pretext, not covered by the amnesty, for prosecuting 
them. It was in this atmosphere that the trial and death of Socrates 
took place- (3W n.r.). 



101 



Part 2. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 

Chapter XI 
SOCRATES 

SOCRATES is a very difficult subject for the historian. There 
are many men concerning whom it is certain that very little 
is known, and other men concerning whom it is certain that 
a great deal is known; but in the case of Socrates the uncertainty 
is as to whether we kno\v very little or a great deal. He was un- 
doubtedly an Athenian citizen of moderate means, who spent his 
time in disputation, and taught philosophy to the young, but not 
for money, like the Sophists. lie was certainly tried, condemned 
to death, and executed in 399 B.C., at about the ape of seventy. 
He was unquestionably a well-known figure in Athens, since 
Aristophanes caricatured him in The Clouds. But beyond this 
point we become involved in controversy. Two of his pupils, 
Xenophon and Plato, wrote voluminously about him, but they 
said very different things. Even when they agree, it has been 
suggested by Burnet that Xenophon is copying Plato. Where they 
disagree, some believe the one, some the other, some neither. In 
such a dangerous dispute, I shall not venture to take sides, but I 
will set out briefly the various points of view. 

Let us begin with Xenophon, a military man, not very lilnrrally 
endowed with brains, and on the whole conventional in his out- 
look. Xenophon is pained that Socrates should have been accused 
of impiety and of corrupting the youth; he contends that, on the 
cont ran\ Socrates was eminently pious and had a thoroughly 
wholesome effect upon those who came under his influence. His 
ideas, it appears, so far from being subversive, were rather dull 
and commonplace. This defence goes too far, since it leaves the 
hostility to Socrates unexplained. As Burnet says (Tliaks to Plato. 
p. 149): "Xenophon *8 defence of .Socrates is too successful. He 
would never have been put to death if he had been like that." 

There has been a tendency to think that everything Xenophon 
gays must be true, because he had not the wits to think/if anything 

102 



SOCRATES 

untrue. This is a very invalid line of argument. A stupid man's 
report of what a clever man says is never accurate, because he un- 
consciously translates what he hears into something that he can 
understand. I would rather be reported by my bitterest enemy 
among philosophers than by a friend innocent of philosophy. We 
cannot therefore accept what Xenophon says if it either involves 
any difficult point in philosophy or is part of an argument to prove 
that Socrates was unjustly condemned. 

Nevertheless, some of Xenophon 's reminiscences are very con- 
vincing. He tells (as Plato also does) how Socrates was continually 
occupied with the problem of getting competent men into positions 
of power. He would ask such questions as: "If I wanted a shoe 
mended, whom should I employ?" To which some ingenuous 
youth would answer: "A shoemaker, O Socrates." He would go 
on to carpenters, coppersmiths, etc., and finally ask some such 
question as "who should mend the Ship of State?" When he fell 
into conflict with the Thirty Tyrants, Critias, their chief, who 
knew his ways from having studied under him, forbade him to 
continue teaching the young, and added: "You had better be 
done with your shoemakers, carpenters, and coppersmiths. These 
must be pretty well trodden out at heel by this time, considering 
the circulation you have given them" (Xenophon, Memorabilia, 
Ilk. I, chap. ii). This happened during the brief oligarchic 
government established by the Spartans at the end of the Pelo- 
ponnesian War. But at most times Athens was democratic, so 
much so that even generals were elected or chosen by lot. Socrates 
came across a young man who wished to become a general, and 
persuaded him that it would be well to know something of the 
art of war. The young man accordingly went away and took a 
brief course in tactics. When he returned, Socrates, after some 
satirical praise, sent him back for further instruction (ibid., Bk. Ill, 
chap. i). Another young man he set to learning the principles of 
finance. He tried the same sort of plan on many people, including 
the war minister; but it was decided that it was easier to silence 
him by means of the hemlock than to cure the evils of which he 
complained. 

With Plato's account of Socrates, the difficulty is quite a different 
one from what it is in the case of Xenophon, namely, that it is 
very hard to judgc'how far Plato means to portray the historical 
Socrates, a'jd how far he intends the person called "Socrates" in 

03 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

his dialogues to be merely the mouthpiece of his own opinions. 
Plato, in addition to being a philosopher, is an imaginative writer 
of great genius and charm. No one supposes, and he himself does 
not seriously pretend, that the conversations in his dialogues took 
place just as he records them. Nevertheless, at any rate in the 
earlier dialogues, the conversation is completely natural and the 
characters quite convincing. It is the excellence of Plato as a 
writer of fiction that throws doubt on him as a historian. His 
Socrates is a consistent and extraordinarily interesting character, 
far beyond the power of most men to invent ; but I think Plato 
could have invented him. Whether he did so is of course another 
question. 

The dialogue which is most generally regarded as historical is 
the Apology. This professes to be the speech that Socrates made in 
his own defence at his trial not, of course, a stenographic report, 
but what remained in Plato's memory some years after the event, 
put together and elaborated with literary art. Plato was present 
at the trial, and it certainly seems fairly clear that what is set 
down is the sort of thing that Plato remembered Socrates as 
saying, and that the intention is, broadly speaking, historical. 
This, with all its limitations, is enough to give a fairly definite 
picture of the character of Socrates. 

The main facts of the trial of Socrates are not open to doubt. 
The prosecution was based upon the charge that " Socrates is an 
evil-doer and a curious person, searching into things under the 
earth and above the heaven; and making the worse appear the 
better cause, and teaching all this to others." The real ground of 
hostility to him was, almost certainly, that he was supposed to 
be connected with the aristocratic party; most of his pupils 
belonged to this faction, and some, in positions of power, had 
proved themselves very pernicious. But this ground could not be 
made evident, on account of the amnesty. He was found guilty 
by a majority, and it was then open to him, by Athenian law, to 
propose some lesser penalty than death. The judges had to choose, 
if they had found the accused guilty, between the penalty de- 
manded by the prosecution and that suggested by the defence. 
It was therefore to the interest of Socrates to suggest a substantial 
penalty, which the court might have accepted as adequate. He, 
however, proposed a fine of thirty minae, for 'which some of his 
friends (including Plato) were willing to go surety. 'Vhis was so 

104 



SOCRATES 

small a punishment that the court was annoyed, and condemned 
him to death by a larger majority than that which had found him 
guilty. Undoubtedly he foresaw this result. It is clear that he had 
no wish to avoid the death penalty by concessions which might 
seem to acknowledge his guilt. 

The prosecutors were Anytus, a democratic politician; Meletus, 
a tragic poet, "youthful and unknown, with lanky hair, and scanty 
beard, and a hooked nose"; and Lykon, an obscure rhetorician. 
(See Burnet, Thales to Plato, p. 180.) They maintained that 
Socrates was guilty of not worshipping the gods the State wor- 
shipped but introducing other new divinities, and further that 
he was guilty of corrupting the young by teaching them accordingly. 

Without further troubling ourselves with the insoluble question 
of the relation of the Platonic Socrates to the real man, let us see 
what Plato makes him say in answer to this charge. 

Socrates begins by accusing his prosecutors of eloquence, and 
rebutting the charge of eloquence as applied to himself. The only 
eloquence of which he is capable, he says, is that of truth. And 
they must not be angry with him if he speaks in his accustomed 
manner, not in "a set oration, duly ornamented with words and 
phrases/* 1 He is over seventy, and has never appeared in a court 
of law until now; they must therefore pardon his un-forensic way 
of speaking. 

lie goes on to say that, in addition to his formal accusers, he has 
a large body of informal accusers, who, ever since the judges were 
children, have gone about "telling of one Socrates, a wise man, 
who speculated about the heavens above, and searched into the 
earth beneath, and made the worse appear the better cause." Such 
men, he says, are supposed not to believe in the existence of the 
Htnls. This old accihsation by public opinion is more dangerous 
than the formal indictment, the more so as he does not know 
who are the men from whom it comes, except in the case of 
Aristophanes. 2 He points out, in reply to these older grounds of 
hostility, that he is not a man of science "I have nothing to do 
with physical speculations" that he is not a teacher, and does 
not take money for teaching. He goes on to make fun of the 
Sophist*, and to disclaim the knowledge that they profess to have. 

1 In quotations frapi Plato, I have generally used Jowett's translation. 
In Tkf Clouds, Socrates is represented as denying the existence of 
Zeus. , 

105 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

What, then, is "the reason why I am called wise and have such 
an evil fame? 1 ' 

The oracle of Delphi, it appears, was once asked if there were 
any man wiser than Socrates, and replied that there was not. 
Socrates professes to have been completely puz/led, since he knew 
nothing, and yet a god cannot lie. He therefore went about among 
men reputed wise, to see whether he could convict the god of 
error. First he went to a politician, who "was thought wise by 
many, and still wiser by himself.*' He soon found that the man 
was not wise, and explained this to him, kindly but firmly, "and 
the consequence was that he hated me." He then went to the 
poets, and asked them to explain passages in their writings, but 
they were unable to do so. "Then I knew that not by wisdom do 
poets write poetry, but by a sort of genius and inspiration. 1 ' Then 
he went to the artisans, but found them equally disappointing. 
In the process, he says, he made many dangerous enemies. Finally 
he concluded that "God only is wise; and by his answer he intends 
to show that the wisdom of men is worth little or nothing; he is 
not speaking of Socrates, he is only using my name by way of 
illustration, as if he said, He, O men, is the wisest, who, like 
Socrates, knows that his wisdom is in truth worth nothing." This 
business of shoeing up pretenders to wisdom takes up all his time, 
and has left him in utter poverty, but he feels it a duty to vindicate 
the oracle. 

Young men of the richer classes, he says, having not much to 
do, enjoy listening to him exposing people, and proceed to do 
likewise, thus increasing the number of his enemies. ''For they 
do not like to confess that their pretence of knowledge has been 
detected." 

So much for the first class of accusers. 

Socrates now proceeds to examine his prosecutor Mektus. "that 
good man and true lover of his country, as he calls himself." He 
asks who are the people who improve the young. Mclctus first 
mentions the judges; then, under pressure, is driven, step by step, 
to say that every Athenian except Socrates improves the young; 
whereupon Socrates congratulates the city on its good fortune. 
Next, he points out that good men are better to live among than 
bad men, and therefore he cannot be so foolish as to corrupt his 
fellow-citizens intentionally ; but if unintentionally, then Mclctus 
should instruct him, not prosecute him. 

106 



SOCRATES 

The indictment had said that Socrates not only denied the gods 
of the State, but introduced other gods of his own ; Meletus, how- 
ever, says that Socrates is a complete atheist, and adds: "He says 
that the sun is stone and the moon earth." Socrates replies that 
Meletus seems to think he is prosecuting Anaxagoras, whose 
views may be heard in the theatre for one drachma (presumably 
in the plays of Euripides). Socrates of course points out that this 
new accusation of complete atheism contradicts the indictment, 
and then passes on to more general considerations. 

The rest of the Apology is essentially religious in tone. He has 
been a soldier, and has remained at his post, as he was ordered 
to do. Now "God orders me to fulfil the philosopher's mission of 
searching into myself and other men," and it would be as shameful 
to desert his post now as in time of battle. Fear of death is not 
wisdom, since no one knows whether death may not be the greater 
good. If he were offered his life on condition of ceasing to speculate 
as he has done hitherto, he would reply: "Men of Athens, I 
honour and love you ; but I shall obey God rather than you, 1 and 
while I have life and strength I shall never cease from the practice 
and teaching of philosophy, exhorting any one whom I meet. . . . 
For know that this is the command of God; and I believe that no 
greater good has ever happened in the State than my service to 
the God." He goes on: 

I have something more to say, at which you may be inclined 
to cry cnit; but I believe that to hear me will be good for you, 
and therefore I beg that you will not cry out. I would have you 
know, that if you kill such a one as I am, you will injure your- 
selves more than you will injure me. Nothing will injure me, 
not Meletus nor yet Anytus they cannot, for a bad man is not 
permitted to injure a belter than himself. I do not deny that 
Anytus may perhaps kill him, or drive him into exile, or deprive 
him of civil rights; and he may imagine, and others may imagine, 
that he is intlicting a great injury upon him: but there I do not 
agree. For the evil of doing as he is doing the evil of unjustly 
taking away the life of another is greater far. 

It is for the sake of his judges, he says, not for his own sake, 
that he is pleading. He is a gad-fly, given to the State by God, and 
it will not be easy to find another like him. "I dare say you may 
feel out of temper(like a person who is suddenly awakened from 

1 Cf. Acts, v, 29. 
107 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sleep), and you think that you might easily strike me dead as 
Anytus advises, and then you would sleep on for the remainder 
of your lives, unless God in his care of you sent you another 
gad-fly." 

Why has he only gone about in private, and not given advice 
on public affairs? "You have heard me speak at sundry times and 
in diverse places of an oracle or sign which comes to me, and is 
the divinity which Meletus ridicules in the indictment. This sign, 
which is a kind of voice, first began to come to me when I was a 
child; it always forbids but never commands me to do anything 
which I am going to do. This is what deters me from being a 
politician." He goes on to say that in politics no honest man can 
live long. He gives two instances in which he was unavoidably 
mixed up in public affairs: in the first, he resisted the democracy; 
in the second, the Thirty Tyrants, in each case when the authorities 
were acting illegally. 

He points out that among those present are many former pupils 
of his, and fathers and brothers of pupils ; not one of these has 
been produced by the prosecution to testify that he corrupts the 
young. (This is almost the only argument in the Apology that a 
lawyer for the defence would sanction.) He refuses to follow the 
custom of producing his weeping children in court, to soften the 
hearts of the judges; such scenes, he says, make the accused and 
the city alike ridiculous. It is his business to convince the judges, 
not to ask a favour of them. 

After the verdict, and the rejection of the alternative penalty of 
thirty minae (in connection with which Socrates names Plato as 
one among his sureties, and present in court), he makes OIK- final 
speech. 

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain 
prophesy to you; for I am about to die, and in the hour of death 
men are gifted with prophetic power. And I prophesy to you, 
who are my murderers, that immediately after my departure 
punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely 
await you. ... If you think that by killing men you can prevent 
some one from censuring your evil lives, you are mistaken; that 
is not a way of escape which is either possible or honourable; 
the easiest and the noblest way is not to be disabling others, but 
to be improving yourselves. 

He then turns to those of his judges w..^ .ave ^voted for 

108 



SOCRATES 

acquittal, and tells them that, in all that he has done that day, his 
oracle has never opposed him, though on other occasions it has 
often stopped him in the middle of a speech. This, he says, "is an 
intimation that what has happened to me is a good, and that those 
of us who think death is an evil are in error." For either death is 
a dreamless sleep which is plainly good or the soul migrates to 
another world. And "what would not a man give if he might 
converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer? 
Nay, if this be true, let me die and die again." In the next world, 
he will converse with others who have suffered death unjustly, 
and, above all, lie will continue his search after knowledge. "In 
another world they do not put a man to death for asking questions: 
assuredly not. For besides being happier than we are, they will 
be immortal, if what is said is true. . . . 

"The hour of departure has arrived, and \ve go our ways I 
to die, ami you to live. Which is better God only knows." 

The Apology gives a clear picture of a man of a certain type: a 
man very sure of himself, high-minded, indifferent to worldly 
success, believing that he is guided by a divine voice, and per- 
suaded that clear thinking is the most important requisite for right 
living. Lxcept in this last point, he resembles a Christian martyr 
or a Puritan. In the final passage, where he considers what happens 
after death, it is impossible not to feel that he firmly believes in 
immortality, and that his professed uncertainty is only assumed. 
He is not troubled, like the Christians, by fears of eternal torment: 
he has no doubt that his life in the next world will be a happy 
one. In the PhaeJo, the Platonic Socrates gives reasons for the 
belief in immortality; whether these were the reasons that in- 
fluenced the historical Socrates, it is impossible to say. 

There seems hardly any doubt that the historical Socrates 
claimed to be guided by an oracle or daimon. Whether this was 
analogous to what a Christian would call the voice of conscience, 
or whether it appeared to him as an actual voice, it is impossible 
to know. Joan of Arc was inspired by voices, which are a common 
symptom of insanity. Socrates was liable to cataleptic trances; at 
least, that seems the natural explanation of such an incident as 
occurred once when he was on military service: 

One morning he was thinking about something which he could 
not resolve; he would not give it up, but continued thinking from 
early dawn until noon there he stood fixed in thought; and at 

109 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

noon attention was drawn to him, and the rumour ran through 
the wondering crowd that Socrates had been standing and thinking 
about something ever since the break of day. At last, in the 
evening after supper, some lonians out of curiosity (I should 
explain that this occurred not in winter but in summer), brought 
out their mats and slept in the open air that they might watch 
him and see whether he would stand all night. There he stood 
until the following morning; and with the return of light he 
offered up a prayer to the sun, and went his way (Symposium, 220). 

This sort of thing, in a lesser degree, was a common occurrence 
with Socrates. At the beginning of the Symposium, Socrates and 
Aristodemus go together to the banquet, but Socrates drops behind 
in a fit of abstraction. When Aristodemus arrives, Agathon, the 
host, says "what have you done with Socrates?" Aristodemus is 
astonished to find Socrates not with him; a slave is sent to look 
for him, and finds him in the portico of a neighbouring house. 
"There he is fixed," says the slave on his return, "ami when I 
call to him he will not stir." Those who know him well explain 
that "he has a way of stopping anywhere and losing himself 
without any reason." They leave him alone, and he enters when 
the feast is half over. 

Every one is agreed that Socrates was very uply; he had a snub 
nose and a considerable paunch ; he was "uglier than all the 
Silenuses in the Satyric drama" (Xenophon, Symposium). He was 
always dressed in shabby old clothes, and went barefoot every- 
where. His indifference to heat and cold, hunger and thirst, 
amazed every one. Alcihiades in the Symposium, describing 
Socrates on military sen-ice, says: 

His endurance was simply marvellous when, beins; cut off from 
our supplies, we were compelled to go without food -on such 
occasions, which often happen in time of war, he was superior 
not only to me but to everybody: there was no one to be com- 
pared to him. ... His fortitude in enduring cold was also 
surprising. There was a severe frost, for the winter in that region 
is really tremendous, and everybody else cither remained indoors 
or if they went out had on an amazing quantity of clothes, and 
were well shod, and had their feet swathed in felt and fleeces: 
in the midst of this, Socrates with his bare feet on the ice and in 
his ordinary dress marched better than the other soldiers who 
had shoes and they looked daggers at him because he seemed 
to despise them. 

no 



SOCRATES 

His mastery over all bodily passions is constantly stressed. He 
seldom drank wine, but when he did, he could out-drink anybody; 
no one had ever seen him drunk. In love, even under the strongest 
temptations, he remained "Platonic," if Plato is speaking the truth. 
He was the perfect Orphic saint: in the dualism of heavenly soul 
and earthly body, he had achieved the complete mastery of the 
soul over the body. His indifference to death at the last is the 
final proof of this mastery. At the same time, he is not an orthodox 
Orphic; it is only the fundamental doctrines that he accepts, not 
the superstitions and ceremonies of purification. 

The Platonic Socrates anticipates both the Stoics and the Cynics. 
The Stoics held that the supreme good is virtue, and that a man 
cannot be deprived of virtue by outside causes ; this doctrine is 
implicit in the contention of Socrates that his judges cannot harm 
him. The Cynics despised worldly goods, and showed their con- 
tempt by eschewing the comforts of civilization; this is the same 
point of view that led Socrates to go barefoot and ill-clad. 

It seems fairly certain that the preoccupations of Socrates were 
ethical rather than scientific. In the Apology, as we saw, he says: 
* 4 I have nothing to do with physical speculations." The earliest 
of the Platonic dialogues, which are generally supposed to be the 
most Socratic, are mainly occupied with the search for definitions 
of ethical terms. The Charmides is concerned with the definition 
of temj>erance or moderation ; the Lysis with friendship ; the Laches 
with courage. In all of these, no conclusion is arrived at, but 
Socrates makes it clear that he thinks it important to examine 
such questions. The Platonic Socrates consistently maintains that 
fie knows nothing, and is only wiser than others in knowing that 
he knows nothing ; but he does not think knowledge unobtainable. 
On the contrary, he thinks the search for knowledge of the utmost 
importance. He maintains that no man sins wittingly, and there- 
fore only knowledge is needed to make all men perfectly virtuous. 

The close connection between virtue and knowledge is charac- 
teristic of Socrates and Plato. To some degree, it exists in all 
Greek thought, as opposed to that of Christianity. In Christian 
ethics, a pure heart is the essential, and is at least as likely to be 
found among the ignorant as among the learned. This difference 
between Greek and Christian ethics has persisted down to the 
present day, * 

Dialectic, that is to say, the method of seeking knowledge by 

in 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

question and answer, was not invented by Socrates. It seems to 
have been first practised systematically by Zeno, the disciple of 
Parmenides ; in Plato's dialogue Parmenides, Zeno subjects Socrates 
to the same kind of treatment to which, elsewhere in Plato, 
Socrates subjects others. But there is every reason to suppose that 
Socrates practised and developed the method. As we saw, when 
Socrates is condemned to death he reflects happily that in the 
next world he can go on asking questions for ever, and cannot be 
put to death, as he will be immortal. Certainly, if he practised 
dialectic in the way described in the Apology, the hostility to him 
is easily explained: all the humbugs in Athens would combine 
against him. 

The dialectic method is suitable for some questions, and un- 
suitable for others. Perhaps this helped to determine the character 
of Plato's inquiries, which were, for the most part, such as could 
be dealt with in this way. And through Plato's influence, most 
subsequent philosophy has been bounded by the limitations 
resulting from his method. 

Some matters are obviously unsuitable for treatment in this way 
empirical science, for example. It is true that Galileo used dia- 
logues to advocate his theories, but that was only in order to 
overcome prejudice the positive grounds for his discoveries 
could not be inserted in a dialogue without great artificiality. 
Socrates, in Plato's works, always pretends that he is only eliciting 
knowledge already possessed by the man he is questioning; on 
this ground, he compares himself to a midwife. When, in the 
Phaedo and the Afeno, he applies his method to geometrical 
problems, he has to ask leading questions which any judge would 
disallow. The method is in harmony with the doctrine of reminis- 
cence, according to which we learn by remembering what we knew 
in a former existence. As against this view, consider any discovery 
that has been made by means of the microscope, say the spread 
of diseases by bacteria; it can hardly be maintained that such 
knowledge can be elicited from a previously ignorant person by 
the method of question and answer. 

The matters that are suitable for treatment by the Socrattc 
method are those as to which we have already enough knowledge 
to come to a right conclusion, but have failed, through confusion 
of thought or lack of analysis, to make the best logical use of what 
we know. A question such as "what is justice?'' is eminently suited 

112 



SOCRATES 

for discussion in a Platonic dialogue. We all freely use the words 
"just" and "unjust," and, by examining the ways in which we 
use them, we can arrive inductively at the definition that will best 
suit with usage. All that is needed is knowledge of how the words 
in question are used. But when our inquiry is concluded, we have 
made only a linguistic discovery, not a discovery in ethics. 

We can, however, apply the method profitably to a somewhat 
larger class of cases. Wherever what is being debated is logical 
rather than factual, discussion is a good method of eliciting truth. 
Suppose someone maintains, for example, that democracy is good, 
hut persons holding certain opinions should not be allowed to 
vote, we may convict him of inconsistency, and prove to him that 
at least one of his two assertions must be more or less erroneous. 
Logical errors are, I think, of greater practical importance than 
many people believe; they enable their perpetrators to hold the 
comfortable opinion on every subject in turn. Any logically 
coherent body of doctrine is sure to be in part painful and con- 
trary to current prejudices. The dialectic method or, more 
generally, the habit of unfettered discussion tends to promote 
logical consistency, and is in this way useful. But it is quite un- 
availing when the object is to discover new facts. Perhaps "philo- 
sophy* 1 might he defined as the sum-total of those inquiries that 
can he pursued by Plato's methods. But if this definition is 
appropriate, that is because of Plato's influence upon subsequent 
philosophers. 



Chapter XII 
THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

E 1O understand Plato, and indeed many later philosophers, 
I it is necessary to know something of Sparta. Sparta had 
JL a double effect on Greek thought: through the reality, and 
through the myth. Each is important. The reality enabled the 
Spartans to defeat Athens in war; the myth influenced Plato's 
political theory, and that of countless subsequent writers. The 
myth, fully developed, is to be found in Plutarch's Life of Lycurgus\ 
the ideals that it favours have had a great part in framing the 
doctrines of Rousseau, Nietzsche, and National Socialism. 1 The 
myth is of even more importance, historically, than the reality ; 
nevertheless, we will begin with the latter. For the reality was the 
source of the myth. 

Laconia, of which Sparta, or Lacedacmon was the capital, 
occupied the south-east of the Peloponnesus. The Spartans, who 
were the ruling race, had conquered the country at the time of the 
Dorian invasion from the north, and had reduced the population 
that they found there to the condition of serfs. These serfs were 
called helots. In historical times, all the land belonged to the 
Spartans, who, however, were forbidden by law and custom to 
cultivate it themselves, both on the ground that such labour was 
degrading, and in order that they might always be free for military 
service. The serfs were not bought and sold, but remained attached 
to the land, which was divided into lots, one or more for each 
adult male Spartan. These lots, like the helots, could not be 
bought or sold, and passed, by law, from father to son. (They 
could, however, be bequeathed.) The landowner received from 
the helot who cultivated the lot seventy medirnni (about 105 
bushels) of grain for himself, twelve for his wife, and a stated 
portion of wine and fruit annually * Anything beyond this amount 
was the property of the helot. The helots were Greeks, like the 
Spartans, and bitterly resented their servile condition. When they 
could, they rebelled. The Spartans had a body of secret police to 

1 Not to mention Dr. Thomas Arnold and the English public schools. 
f Bury, History of Greece, Vol. I, p. 138. It wen is that Spartan men ate 
nearly six times as much as their wive*. 

"4 



THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

deal with this danger, but to supplement this precaution they had 
another: once a year, they declared war on the helots, so that their 
young men could kill any who seemed insubordinate without 
incurring the legal guilt of homicide. Helots could be emancipated 
by the State, but not by their masters; they were emancipated, 
rather rarely, for exceptional bravery in battle. 

At some time during the eighth century B.C. the Spartans con- 
quered the neighbouring country of Messenia, and reduced most 
of its inhabitants to the condition of helots. There had been a 
lack of Lebensraum in Sparta, but the new territory, for a time, 
removed this source of discontent. 

Lois were for the common run of Spartans; the aristocracy had 
estates of their own, whereas the lots were portions of common 
land assigned by the State. 

The free inhabitants of other parts of Laconia, called "p^rioeci," 
had no share of political power. 

The sole business of a Spartan citizen was war, to which he was 
trained from birth. Sickly children were exposed after inspection 
by the heads of the tribe; only those judged vigorous were allowed 
to be reared. Up to the age of twenty, all the boys were trained in 
one big school; the purpose of the training was to make them 
hardy, indifferent to pain, and submissive to discipline. There 
was no nonsense about cultural or scientific education; the sole 
aim was to produce good soldiers, wholly devoted to the State. 

At the age of twenty, actual military service began. Marriage 
uas permitted to anyone over the age of twenty, but until the 
age of thirty a man had to live in the "men's house," and had to 
manage his marriage as if it were an illicit and secret affair. After 
thirty, he was a full-fledged citizen. Every citizen belonged to a 
mess, and dined with the other members; he had to make a 
contribution in kind from the produce of his lot. It was the theory 
of the State that no Spartan citizen should be destitute, and none 
should be rich. Each was expected to live on the produce of his 
lot, which lie could not alienate except by free gift. None was 
allowed to own gold or silver, and the money was made of iron. 
Spartan simplicity became proverbial. 

The position of women in Sparta was peculiar. They were not 
secluded, like respectable women elsewhere in Greece. Girls went 
through the same 'physical training as was given to boys; what is 
more remarkable, boys and girls did their gymnastics together, 

"5 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

all being naked. It was desired (I quote Plutarch's Lycurgus in 
North's translation): 

that the maidens should harden their bodies with exercise of 
running, wrestling, throwing the bar, and casting the dart, to the 
end that the fruit wherewith they might be afterwards con- 
ceived, taking nourishment of a strong and lusty body, should 
shoot out and spread the better: and that they by gathering 
strength thus by exercises, should more easily away with the 
pains of child bearing. . . . And though the maidens did show 
themselves thus naked openly, yet was there no dishonesty seen 
nor offered, but all this sport was full of play and toys, without 
any youthful part or wantonness. 

Men who would not marry were made "infamous by law/* and 
compelled, even in the coldest weather, to walk up and down 
naked outside the place where the young people were doing their 
exercises and dances. 

Women were not allowed to exhibit any emotion not profitable 
to the State. They might display contempt for a coward, and 
would be praised if he were their son; but they might not show 
grief if their new-born child was condemned to death as a weakling, 
or if their sons were killed in battle. They were considered, by 
other Greeks, exceptionally chaste; at the same time, a childless 
married woman would raise no objection if the State ordered her 
to find out whether some other man would be more successful 
than her husband in begetting citizens. Children were encouraged 
by legislation. According to Aristotle, the father of three sons was 
exempt from military service, and the father of four from all the 
burdens of the State. 

The constitution of Sparta was complicated. There were two 
kings, belonging to two different families, and succeeding by 
heredity. One or other of the kings commanded the army in time 
of war, but in time of peace their powers were limited. At com- 
munal feasts they got twice as much to eat as any one else, and 
there was general mourning when one of them died. They were 
members of the Council of Klders, a body consisting of thirty 
men (including the kings); the other twenty-eight must be over 
sixty, and were chosen for life by the whole body of the citizens, 
but only from aristocratic families. The Council tried criminal 
cases, and prepared matters which were to 'come before the 
Assembly. This body (the Assembly) consisted of all the citizens ; 

116 



THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

it could not initiate anything, but could vote yes or no to any 
proposal brought before it. No law could be enacted without 
its consent. But its consent, though necessary, was not sufficient ; 
the elders and magistrates must proclaim the decision before it 
became valid. 

In addition to the kings, the Council of Elders, and the 
Assembly, there was a fourth branch of the government, peculiar 
to Sparta. This was the five ephors. These were chosen out of the 
whole body of the citizens, by a method which Aristotle says was 
"too childish," and which Bury says was virtually by lot. They 
were a "democratic 11 element in the constitution, 1 apparently 
intended to balance the kings. Every month the kings swore to 
uphold the constitution, and the ephors then swore to uphold the 
kings so long as they remained true to their oath. When either 
king went on a warlike expedition, two ephors accompanied him 
to watch over his behaviour. The ephors were the supreme civil 
court, but over the kings they had criminal jurisdiction. 

The Spartan constitution was supposed, in later antiquity, to 
have been due to a legislator named Lycurgus, who was said to 
have promulgated his laws in 885 B.C. In fact, the Spartan system 
grew up gradually, and Lycurgus was a mythical person, originally 
a god. His name meant "wolf-repcller," and his origin was 
Arcadian. 

Sparta aroused among the other Greeks an admiration which 
is to us somewhat surprising. Originally, it had been much less 
different from other Greek cities than it became later; in early 
days it produced ports and artists as good as those elsewhere. 
But about the seventh century B.C., or perhaps even later, its con- 
stitution (falsely attributed to Lycurgus) crystallized into the form 
we have been considering; everything else was sacrificed to success 
in war, and Sparta ceased to have any part whatever in what 
Greece contributed to the civilization of the world. To us, the 
Spartan State appears as a model, in miniature, of the State that 
the Nazis would establish if victorious. To the Greeks it seemed 
otherwise. As Bury says: 

A stranger from Athens or Miletus in the fifth century visiting 
the straggling villages which formed her unwalled unpretentious 

1 In speaking of " Jemocratie" elements in the Spartan constitution, one 
must of course remember that the citizens as a whole were a ruling class 
fiercely tyrannizing over the helots, and allowing no power to die perioeci. 

117 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

city must have bad a feeling of being transported into an age 
long past, when men were braver, better and simpler, unspoiled 
by wealth,. undisturbed by ideas. To a philosopher, like Plato, 
speculating in political science, the Spartan State seemed the 
nearest approach to the ideal. The ordinary Greek looked upon 
it as a structure of severe and simple beauty, a Dorian city stately 
as a Dorian temple, far nobler than his own abode but not so 
comfortable to dwell in. 1 

One reason for the admiration felt for Sparta by other Greeks 
was its stability. All other Greek cities had revolutions, but the 
Spartan constitution remained unchanged for centuries, except 
for a gradual increase in the powers of the ephors, which occurred 
by legal means, without violence. 

It cannot be denied that, for a long period, the Spartans were 
successful in their main purpose, the creation of a race of invincible 
warriors. The battle of Thermopylae (480 B.C.), though technically 
a defeat, is perhaps the best example of their valour. Thermopylae 
was a narrow pass through the mountains, where it was hoped 
that the Persian army could be held. Three hundred Spartans, 
with auxiliaries, repulsed all frontal attacks. Hut at last the Persians 
discovered a detour through the hills, and succeeded in attacking 
the Greeks on both sides at once. Every single Spartan was killed 
at his post. Two men had been absent on sick leave, suffering 
from a disease of the eyes amounting almost to ternporar} blind- 
ness. One of them insisted on being led by his helot to the battle, 
where he perished; the other, Aristodemus, decided that lie was 
too ill to fight, and remained absent. When he returned to Sparta, 
no one would speak to him; he was called "the coward ArLsto- 
demus." A year later, he wiped out his disgrace by dying bravely 
at the battle of Plataea, where the Spartans were victorious. 

After the war, the Spartans erected a memorial on the battlefield 
of Thermopylae, saying only: "Stranger, tell the Lacedaemonians 
that we lie here, in obedience to their orders/' 

For a long time, the Spartans proved themselves invincible on 
land. They retained their supremacy until the year 371 B.C., when 
they were defeated by the Thebans at the battle of Lcuctra. This 
was the end of their military greatness. 

Apart from war, the reality of Sparta was never quite the same 
as the theory. Herodotus, who lived at its great period, remarks, 
1 History of Greece t Vol. I, p. 141. 



THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

surprisingly, that no Spartan could resist a bribe. This was in spite 
of the fact that contempt for riches and love of the simple life was 
one of the main things inculcated in Spartan education. We are 
told that the Spartan women were chaste, yet it happened several 
times that a reputed heir to the kingship was set aside on the 
ground of not being the son of his mother's husband. We are told 
that the Spartans were inflexibly patriotic, yet the king Pausanias, 
the victor of Plataea, ended as a traitor in the pay of Xerxes. 
Apart from such flagrant matters, the policy of Sparta was always 
petty and provincial. When Athens liberated the Greeks of Asia 
Minor and the adjacent islands from the Persians, Sparta held 
aloof; so long as the Peloponnesus was deemed safe, the fate of 
other (ireeks was a matter of indifference. Every attempt at a 
confederation of the Hellenic world was defeated by Spartan 
particularism. 

Aristotle, who lived after the downfall of Sparta, gives a very 
hostile account of its constitution. 1 What he says is so different 
from what other people say that it is difficult to believe he is 
speaking of the same place, e.g. "The legislator wanted to make 
the whole State hardy and temperate, and he has carried out his 
intention in the case of men, but he has neglected the women, 
who live in even* sort of intemperance and luxury. The conse- 
quence is that in such a State wealth is too highly valued, especially 
if the citixcns fall under the dominion of their wives, after the 
manner of most warlike races. . . . Even in regard to courage, 
which is of no use in daily life, and is needed only in war, the 
influence of the I^iccdaemonian women has been most mischievous. 
. . . This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the 
earliest times, and was only what might be expected. For . . . 
when I.vcurgus, as tradition says, wanted to bring the women 
under his laws, they resisted, and he gave up the attempt." 

1 le goes on to accuse Spartans of avarice, which he attributes 
to the unequal distribution of property. Although lots cannot be 
sold, he says, they can be given or bequeathed. Two-fifths of all 
the land, he adds, belongs to women. The consequence is a great 
diminution in the number of citizens: it is said that once there 
were ten thousand, but at the time of the defeat by Thebes there 
were less than one thousand. 

Aristotle criticfccs every point of the Spartan constitution. He 
, Vol. II, Q ( 126911- 1 270A). 

IK) 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

says that the ephors are often very poor, and therefore easy to 
bribe ; and their power is so great that even kings are compelled 
to court them, so that the constitution has been turned into a 
democracy. The ephor?, we are told, have too much licence, and 
live in a manner contrary to the spirit of the constitution, while 
the strictness in relation to ordinary citizens is so intolerable that 
they take refuge in the secret illegal indulgence of sensual pleasures. 

Aristotle wrote when Sparta was decadent, but on some points 
he expressly says that the evil he is mentioning has existed from 
early times. His tone is so dry and realistic that it is difficult to 
disbelieve him, and it is in line with all modern experience of the 
results of excessive severity in the laws. But it was not Aristotle's 
Sparta that persisted in men's imagination; it was the mythical 
Sparta of Plutarch and the philosophic idealization of Sparta in 
Plato's Republic. Century after century, young men read these 
works, and were fired with the ambition to become Lycurguses 
or philosopher-kings. The resulting union of idealism and love of 
power has led men astray over and over again, and is still doing so 
in the present day. 

The myth of Sparta, for medieval and modern readers, was 
mainly fixed by Plutarch. When he wrote, Sparta belonged to the 
romantic past ; its great period was as far removed from his time 
as Columbus is from ours. What he says must IK* treated with 
great caution by the historian of institutions, but to the historian 
of myth it is of the utmost importance. Greece has influenced the 
world, always, through its effect on men's imaginations, ideals, 
and hopes, not directly through political power. Rome made roads 
which largely still survive, and la\v> which are the source of many 
modern legal codes, but it was the armies of Rome that made these 
things important. The Greeks, though admirable fighters, made 
few conquests, because they expended their military fury mainly 
on each other. It was left to the semi-barbarian Alexander to spread 
Hellenism throughout the Near Kast, and to make Greek the 
literary language in Kgypt and Syria and the inland parts of Asia 
Minor. The Greeks could never have accomplished this task, not 
for lack of military force, but owing to their incapacity for 
political cohesion. The political vehicles of Hellenism have always 
been non-Hellenic; but it was the Greek genius that so inspired 
alien nations as to cause them to spread the* culture of those 
whom they had conquered. 

120 



THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

What is important to the historian of the world is not the petty 
wars between Greek cities, or the sordid squabbles for party 
ascendancy, but the memories retained by mankind when the 
brief episode was ended like the recollection of a brilliant sunrise 
in the Alps, while the mountaineer struggles through an arduous 
day of wind and snow. These memories, as they gradually faded, 
left in men's minds the images of certain peaks that had shone 
with peculiar brightness in the early light, keeping alive the 
knowledge that behind the clouds a splendour still survived, and 
might at any moment become manifest. Of these, Plato was the 
most important in early Christianity, Aristotle in the medieval 
Church; hut when, after the Renaissance, men began to value 
political freedom, it was above all to Plutarch that they turned. 
I le influenced profoundly the English and French liberals of the 
eighteenth century, and the founders of the United States; he 
influenced the romantic movement in Germany, and has con- 
tinued, mainly by indirect channels, to influence German thought 
down to the present day. In some ways his influence was good, 
in some bad; as regards Lycurgus and Sparta, it was bad. What 
he has to say about Lycurgus is important, and I shall give a brief 
account of it, even at the cost of some repetition. 

Lycurgus so Plutarch says having resolved to give laws to 
Sparta, travelled widely in order to study different institutions. 
He liked the laws of Crete, which were "very straight and severe," 1 
but disliked tho.se of Ionia, where there were "superfluities and 
vanities.*' In Kgypt he learned the advantage of separating the 
soldiers from the rest of the people, and afterwards, having 
returned from his travels, "brought the practice of it into Sparta: 
where setting the merchants, artificers, and labourers every one 
a part by themselves, he did establish a noble Commonwealth." 
He nude an equal division of hinds among all the citizens of Sparta 
in order to "banish out of the city all insolvency, envy, covetous- 
ness, and dcliciousness, and also all riches and poverty." He for- 
bade gold and silver money, allowing only iron coinage, of so 
little value that "to lay up thereof the value often minas, it would 
have occupied a whole cellar in a house." By this means he 
banished "all superfluous and unprofitable sciences," since there 
was not enough money to pay their practitioners; and by the 
same law he made'all external commerce impossible. Rhetoricians, 
N ' In quoting Plutarch I use North's translation. 
121 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

panders, and jewellers, not liking the iron money, avoided Sparta. 
He next ordained that all the citizens should eat together, and all 
should have the same food. 

Lycurgus, like other reformers, thought the education of children 
"the chiefest and greatest matter, that a reformer of laws should 
establish"; and like all who aim chiefly nt military power, he was 
anxious to keep up the birth rate. The M plays, sports, and dances 
the maids did naked before young men, were provocations to draw 
and allure the young men to marry: not as persuaded by geo- 
metrical reasons, as saith Plato, but brought to it by liking, and of 
very love." The habit of treating a marriage, for the first few years, 
as if it were a clandestine affair, "continued in both parties a still 
burning love, and a new desire of the one to the other" such, at 
least, is the opinion of Plutarch. He goes on to explain that a man 
was not thought ill of if, being old and having a young wife, he 
allowed a younger man to have children by her. "It was lawful 
also for an honest man that loved another man's wife ... to intreat 
her husband to suffer him to lie with her, and that he might also 
plough in that lusty ground, an j e^t abroad the seed of well- 
favoured children." There was to be no foolish jealousy, for 
"Lycurgus did not like that children should be private to any 
men, but that they should be common to the common weal: by 
which reason he would also, that such as should become citizens 
should not be begotten of every man, but of the most honest 
men only." He goes on to explain that this is the principle that 
farmers apply to their live-stock. 

When a child was born, the father brought him before the 
elders of his family to be examined: if he was healthy, he was 
given back to the father to he reared; if not, he was thrown into 
a deep pit of water. Children, from the first, were subjected to a 
severe hardening process, in some respects good for example, 
they were not put in swaddling clothes. At the age of seven, boys 
were taken away from home and put in a boarding school, where 
they were divided into companies, each under the orders of one 
of their number, chosen for sense and courage. "Touching learning, 
they had as much as served their turn: for the rest of their time 
they spent in learning how to obey, to away with pain, to endure 
labour, to overcome still in fight." They played naked together 
most of the time; after twelve years old, they wf>re no coals; they 
were always "nasty and sluttish," and they never bathed except 

122 



THE INFLUENCE OF SPARTA 

on certain days in the year. They slept on beds of straw, which 
in winter they mixed with thistle. They were taught to steal, and 
were punished if caught not for stealing, but for stupidity. 

Homosexual love, male if not female, was a recognized 
custom in Sparta, and had an acknowledged part in the education 
of adolescent boys. A boy's lover suffered credit or discredit by 
the boy's actions; Plutarch states that once, when a boy cried out 
because he was hurt in fighting, his lover was fined for the boy's 
cowardice. 

There was little liberty at any stape in the life of a Spartan. 

Their discipline and order of life continued still, after they 
were full grown men, For it was not lawful for any man to live 
as he listed, but they were within tlieir city, as if they had been in 
a camp, where every man knoweth what allowance he hath to live 
withal, and what business he hath else to do in his calling. To be 
short, they were all of this mind, that they were not born to serve 
themselves, but to serve their country. . . . One of the best and 
happit-st things which Lycurpus ever brought into his city, was 
the preat rest and leisure which he made his citizens to have, only 
forhiddini; them that they should not profess any vile or base 
occupation: and they needed not also to be careful to get great 
riches, in a place where goods were nothing profitable nor esteemed. 
For the 1 lelots, which were bond men made by the wars, did till 
their grounds, and yielded them a certain revenue every year. 

Plutarch goes on to tell a story of an Athenian condemned for 
idleness, upon hearing of which a Spartan exclaimed: "show me 
the man condemned for living nobly and like a gentleman." 

Lycurijus (Plutarch continues) "did accustom his citizens so, 
that they neither would nor could live alone, but were in manner 
as men incorporated one with another, and were always in company 
together, as the bees be about their master bee." 

Spartans were not allowed to travel, nor were foreigners admitted 
to Sparta, except on business; for it was feared that alien customs 
uould corrupt Lacedaemonian virtue. 

Plutarch relates the law that allowed Spartans to kill helots 
whenever they felt so disposed, but refuses to believe that any- 
thing so abominable can have been due to Lycurgus. "For I 
cannot be persuaded, that ever Lycurgus invented, or instituted 
so wicked and mischievous an act, as that kind of ordinance was: 
because I imagine his nature was gentle and merciful, by the 

123 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

clemency and justice we see he used in- all his other doings/* 
Except in this matter Plutarch has nothing but praise for the 
constitution of Sparta. 

The effect of Sparta on Plato, with whom, at the moment, we 
shall be specially concerned, will be e\ident from the account of 
his Utopia, which will occupy the next chapter. 



124 



Chapter XIII 
THE SOURCES OF PLATO'S OPINIONS 

PLATO and Aristotle were the most influential of all philo- 
sophers, ancient, medieval, or modern; and of the two, it 
was Plato who had the greater effect upon subsequent ages. 
I say this for two reasons: first, that Aristotle himself is an out- 
come of Plato; second, that Christian theology and philosophy, at 
any rate until the thirteenth century, was much more Platonic 
than Aristotelian. It is necessary therefore, in a history of philo- 
sophic thought, to treat Plato, and to a lesser degree Aristotle, 
more fully than any of their predecessors or successors. 

The most important matters in Plato's philosophy are: fast, his 
Utopia, which was the earliest of a long series; second, his theory 
of ideas, which was a pioneer attempt to deal with the still unsolved 
problem of universal*; third, his arguments in favour of immor- 
tality; fourth, his cosmogony; fifth, his conception of knowledge 
as reminiscence rather than perception. But before dealing with 
any of these topics, I shall say a few words about the circumstances 
of his life and the influences which determined his political and 
philosophical opinions. 

Plato was born in 428-7 B.C., in the early years of the Pelo- 
ponncsian War. He was a well-to-do aristocrat, related to various 
people who were concerned in the rule of the Thirty Tyrants. He 
was a young man when Athens was defeated, and he could attribute 
the defeat to democracy, which his social position and his family 
connections were likely to make him despise. He was a pupil of 
Socrates, for whom he had a profound affection and respect; and 
Socrates was put to death by the democracy. It is not, therefore, 
surprising that he should turn to Sparta for an adumbration of 
his ideal commonwealth. Plato possessed the an to dress up 
illiberal suggestions in such a way that they deceived future ages, 
which admired the Republic without ever becoming aware of what 
was involved in its proposals. It has always been correct to praise 
Plato, but not to understand him. This is the common fate of 
great men. My object is the opposite. I wish to understand hiiiL 
but to treat him vrith as little reverence as if he were a corirern- 
porary Knclish or American advocate of totalitarianism. ,*y? Or 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The purely philosophical influences on Plato were also such as 
to predispose him in favour of Sparta. These influences, speaking 
broadly, were: Pythagoras, Parmenides, Heraclitus, and Socrates. 

From Pythagoras (whether by way of Socrates or not) Plato 
derived the Orphic elements in his philosophy: the religious trend, 
the belief in immortality, the other-worldliness, the priestly tone, 
and all that is involved in the simile of the cave; also his respect 
for mathematics, and his intimate intermingling of intellect and 
mysticism. 

From Parmenides he derived the belief that reality is eternal 
and timeless, and that, on logical grounds, all change* must be 
illusory. 

From Heraclitus he derived the negative doctine that there is 
nothing permanent in the sensible world. This, combined with the 
doctrine of Parmenides, led to the conclusion that knowledge is 
not to be derived from the senses, but is only to be achieved by 
the intellect. This, in turn, fitted in well with Pythagoreanism. 

From Socrates he probably learnt his preoccupation with 
ethical problems, and his tendency to seek teleological rather than 
mechanical explanations of the world. "The Good" dominated his 
thought more than that of the pre-Socratics, and it is difficult not 
to attribute this fact to the influence of Socrates. 

How is all this connected with authoritarianism in politics ? 

In the first place: Goodness and Reality being timeless, the best 
State will be the one which most nearly copies the heavenly model, 
by having a minimum of change and a maximum of static perfec- 
tion, and its rulers should be those who best understand the 
eternal Good. 

In the second place: Plato, like all mystics, has, in his beliefs, 
a core of certainty which is essentially incommunicable except by 
a way of life. The Pythagoreans had endeavoured to set up a rule 
of the initiate, and this is, at bottom, what Plato desires. If a man 
is to be a good statesman, he must know the Good; this he can 
only do by a combination of intellectual and moral discipline. 
If those who have not gone through this discipline are allowed a 
share in the government, they will inevitably corrupt it. 

In the third place: much education is needed to make a good 

''er on Plato's principles. It seems to us unwise to have insisted 

chtng geometry to the younger Dion VMusJ tyrant of Syracuse, 

r to make him a good king, but from Plato's point of view 

126 



THE SOURCES OF PLATO'S OPINIONS 

it was essential. He was sufficiently Pythagorean to think that 
without mathematics no true wisdom is possible. This view implies 
an oligarchy. 

In the fourth place: Plato, in common with most Greek philo- 
sophers, took the view that leisure is essential to wisdom, which 
will therefore not be found among those who have to work for 
their living, but only among those who have independent means 
or who are relieved by the State from anxieties as to their sub- 
sistence. This point of view is essentially aristocratic. 

Two general questions arise in confronting Plato with modern 
ideas. The first is: is there such a thing as "wisdom"? The second 
is: granted that there is such a thing, can any constitution be 
devised that will give it political power? 

"Wisdom," in the sense supposed, would not be any kind of 
specialized skill, such as is possessed by the shoemake- or the 
physician or the military tactician. It must be something more 
generali/cd than this, since its possession is supposed to make a 
man capable of governing wisely. I think Plato would have said 
that it consists in knowledge of the good, and would have supple- 
mented this definition with the Socratic doctrine that no man 
Mns wittingly, from which it follows that whoever knows what is 
good does what is right. To us, such a view seems remote from 
reality. We should more naturally say that there are divergent 
interests, and that the statesman should arrive at the best available 
compromise. The members of a class or a nation may have a 
common interest, but it will usually conflict with the interests of 
other classes or other nations. There are, no doubt, some interests 
of mankind as a whole, but they do not suffice to determine political 
action. Perhaps they will do so at some future date, but certainly 
not so long as there are many sovereign States. And even then the 
most difficult part of the pursuit of the general interest would 
consist in arriving at compromises among mutually hostile special 
interests. 

But even if we suppose that there is such a thing as "wisdom," 
is there any form of constitution which will give the government 
to the wise? It is clear that majorities, like general councils, may 
err, and in fact have erred. Aristocracies are not always wise; kings 
are often foolish ; Popes, in spite of infallibility, have committed 
grievous errors. Wduld anybody advocate entrusting the govern- 
ment to university graduates, or even to doctors of divinity? Or 

127 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

to men who, having been born poor, have made great fortunes? 
It is clear that no legally definable selection of citizens is likely to 
be wiser, in practice, than the whole body. 

It might be suggested that men could be given political wisdom 
by a suitable training. But the question would arise: what is a 
suitable training? And this would turn out to be a party question. 

The problem of finding a collection of "wise" men and leaving 
the government to them is thus an insoluble one. That is the 
ultimate reason for democracy. 



128 



Chapter XIV 
PLATO'S UTOPIA 

PLATO'S most important dialogue, the Republic, consists, 
broadly, of three parts. The first (to near the end of Book V) 
consists in the construction of an ideal commonwealth ; it is 
the earliest of Utopias. 

One of the conclusions arrived at is that the rulers must be philo- 
sophers. Books VI and VII are concerned to define the word 
" philosopher." This discussion constitutes the second section. 

The third section consists mainly of a discussion of various 
kinds of actual constitutions and of their merits and defects. 

The nominal purpose of the Republic is to define "justice." But 
at an early stage it is decided that, since everything is easier to see 
in the large than in the small, it will be better to inquire what 
makes a just State than what makes a just individual. And since 
justice must be among the attributes of the best imaginable State, 
such a State is first delineated, and then it is decided which of its 
perfections is to be called "justice." 

Let us first describe Plato's Utopia in its broad outlines, and 
then consider points that arise by the way. 

Plato begins by deciding that the citizens are to be divided into 
three classes: the common people, the soldiers, and the guardians. 
'I 'he last, alone, are to have political power. There are to be much 
fewer of them than of the other two classes. In the first instance, 
it seems, they are to be chosen by the legislator; after that, they 
will usually succeed by heredity, but in exceptional cases a pro- 
mising child may be promoted from one of the inferior classes, 
while among the children of guardians a child or young man who 
is unsatisfactory may be degraded. 

The main problem, as Plato perceives, is to insure that the 
guardians shall carry out the intentions of the legislator. For this 
purpose he has various proposals, educational, economic, biological, 
and religious. It is not always clear how far these proposals apply 
to other classes than the guardians; it is clear that some of them 
apply to the soldiers, but in the main Plato is concerned only 
with the guardians? who are to be a class apart, like the Jesuits in 
old Paraguay, the ecclesiastics in the States of the Church until 

1 19 * 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

1870, and the Communist Party in the U.S.S.R. at the present day. 

The first thing to consider is education. This is divided into 
two parts, music and gymnastics. Each has a wider meaning than 
at present: "music" means everything that is in the province of 
the muses, and "gymnastics" means everything concerned with 
physical training and fitness. "Music" is almost as wide as what 
we should call "culture/ 9 and "gymnastics" is somewhat wider 
than what we call "athletics." 

Culture is to be devoted to making men gentlemen, in the sense 
which, largely owing to Plato, is familiar in England. The Athens 
of his day was, in one respect, analogous to England in the nine- 
teenth century: there was in each an aristocracy enjoying wealth 
and social prestige, but having no monopoly of political power; 
and in each the aristocracy had to secure as much power as it 
could by means of impressive behaviour. In Plato's Utopia, 
however, the aristocracy rules unchecked. 

Gravity, decorum and courage seem to be the qualities mainly 
to be cultivated in education. There is to be a rigid censorship 
from very early years over the literature to which the young have 
access and the music they are allowed to hear. Mothers and nurses 
are to tell their children only authorized stories. Homer and 
Hesiod are not to be allowed, for a number of reasons. First they 
represent the gods as behaving badly on occasion, which is un- 
edifying; the young must be taught that evils never come from 
the gods, for God is not the author of all things, but only of good 
things. Second, there are things in Homer and Hesiod which art- 
calculated to make their readers fear death, whereas everything 
ought to he done in education to make young people willing to 
die in battle. Our boys must be taught to consider slavery worse 
than death, and therefore they must have no stories of good men 
weeping and wailing, even for the death of friends. Third, decorum 
demands that there should never be loud laughter, and yet Homer 
speaks of "inextinguishable laughter among the blessed gods/' 
How is a schoolmaster to reprove mirth effectively, if boys can 
quote this passage? Fourth, there are passages in Homer praising 
rich feasts, and others describing the lusts of the gods; such 
passages discourage temperance. (Dean Inge, a true Platonist, 
objected to a line in a well-known hymn: "The shout of them 
thai triumph, the song of them that feast/' which occurs in a 
description of die joys of heaven.) Then there must be no stories 

130 



PLATO'S UTOPIA 

in which the wicked are happy or the good unhappy; the moral 
effect on tender minds might be most unfortunate. On all these 
counts, the poets are to be condemned. 

Plato passes on to a curious argument about the drama. The 
good man, he says, ought to be unwilling to imitate a bad man; 
now most plays contain villains; therefore the dramatist, and the 
actor who plays the villain's part, have to imitate people guilty of 
various crimes. Not only criminals, but women, slaves, and 
inferiors generally, ought not to be imitated by superior men. 
(In Greece, as in Elizabethan England, women's parts were acted 
by men.) Plays, therefore, if permissible at all, must contain no 
characters except faultless male heroes of good birth. The im- 
possibility of this is so evident that Plato decides to banish all 
dramatists from his city: 

When any of these pantomimic gentlemen, who are so clever 
that they can imitate anything, comes to us, and makes a proposal 
to exhibit himself and his poetry, we will fall down and worship 
him as a sweet and holy and wonderful being; but we must 
also inform him that in our State such as he are not permitted to 
exist ; the law will not allow them. And so when we have anointed 
him with myrrh, and set a garland of wool upon his head, we shall 
send him away to another city. 

Next we come to the censorship of music (in the modern sense). 
The Lydian and Ionian harmonies are to be forbidden, the first 
because it expresses sorrow, the second because it is relaxed. Only 
the Dorian (for courage) and the Phrygian (for temperance) are 
to be allowed. Permissible rhythms must be simple, and such as 
are expressive of a courageous and harmonious life. 

The training of the body is to be very austere. No one is to eat 
fish, or meat cooked otherwise than roasted, and there must be 
no sauces or confectionery. People brought up on his regimen, 
he says, will have no need of doctors. 

Up to a certain age, the young are to sec no ugliness or vice. 
But at a suitable moment, they must be exposed to "enchant- 
ments/* both in the shape of terrors that must not terrify, and of 
bad pleasures that must not seduce the will. Only after they have 
withstood these tests will they be judged fit to be guardians. 

Young boys, before they are grown up, should see war, though 
they should not themselves fight. 

As for economics: Plato proposes a thoroughgoing communism 

'3 1 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

for the guardians, and (I think) also for the soldiers, though this 
is not very clear. The guardians are to have small houses and 
simple food ; they are to live as in a camp, dining together in com- 
panies; they are to have no private property beyond what is 
absolutely necessary. Gold and silver are to be forbidden. Though 
not rich, there is no reason why they should not be happy; but 
the purpose of the city is the good of the whole, not the happiness 
of one class. Both wealth and poverty are harmful, and in Plato's 
city neither will exist. There is a curious argument about war, 
that it will be easy to purchase allies, since our city will not want 
any share in the spoils of victory. 

With feigned unwillingness, the Platonic Socrates proceeds to 
apply his communism to the family. Friends, he says, should 
have all things in common, including women and children. He 
admits that this presents difficulties, but thinks them not insuper- 
able. First of all, girls are to have exactly the same education as 
boys, learning music, gymnastics, and the art of war along with 
the boys. Women are to have complete equality with men in all 
respects. "The same education which makes a man a good guardian 
will make a woman a good guardian ; for their original nature is 
the same." No doubt there are differences between men and 
women, but they have nothing to do with politics. Some women 
are philosophic, and suitable as guardians; some are warlike, and 
could make good soldiers. 

The legislator, having selected the guardians, some men and 
some women, will ordain that they shall all share common houses 
and common meals. Marriage, as we know it, will be radically 
transformed. 1 At certain festivals, brides and bridegrooms, in 
such numbers as are required to keep the population constant, 
mil be brought together, by lot, as they will be taught to believe; 
but in fact the rulers of the city will manipulate the lots on eugenic 
principles. They will arrange that the best sires shall have the 
most children. All children will be taken away from their parents 
at birth, and great care will be taken that no parents shall know 
who are their children, and no children shall know who are their 
parents. Deformed children, and children of inferior parents, "will 
be put away in some mysterious unknown place, as they ought to 
be." Children arising from unions not sanctioned by the State 

1 "These women ahull be, without exception, the common wives of 
these men, and no one shall have a wife of hit own." 

'3* 



PLATO'S UTOPIA 

are to be considered illegitimate. Mothers are to be between 
twenty and forty, fathers between twenty-five and fifty-five. Out- 
side these ages, intercourse is to be free, but abortion or infanticide 
is to be compulsory. In the "marriages" arranged by the State, 
the people concerned have no voice; they are to be actuated by 
the thought of their duty to the State, not by any of those common 
emotions that the banished poets used to celebrate. 

Since no one knows who his parents are, he is to call every one 
"father" whose age is such that he might be his father, and 
similarly as regards "mother" and "brother" and "sister." (This 
sort of thing happens among some savages, and used to puzzle 
missionaries.) There is to be no marriage between a "father" and 
"daughter" or "mother" and "son" ; in general, but not absolutely, 
marriages of "brother" and "sister" are to be prevented. (I think 
if Plato had thought this out more carefully he would have found 
that he had prohibited all marriages, except the "brother-sister" 
marriages which he regards as rare exceptions.) 

It is supposed that the sentiments at present attached to the 
words "father," "mother," "son," and "daughter" will still attach 
to them under Plato's new arrangements; a young man, for 
instance, will not strike an old man, because he might be striking 
his father. 

The advantage sought is, of course, to minimize private pos- 
sessive emotions, and so remove obstacles to the domination of 
public spirit, as well as to acquiescence in the absence of private 
property. It was largely motives of a similar kind that led to the 
celibacy of the clergy. 1 

I come last to the theological aspect of the system. I am not 
thinking of the accepted Greek gods, but of certain myths which 
the government is to inculcate. Lying, Plato says explicitly, is to 
be a prerogative of the government, just as giving medicine is of 
physicians. The government, as we have already seen, is to 
deceive people in pretending to arrange marriages by lot, but this 
is not a religious matter. 

There is to be "one royal lie," which, Plato hopes, may deceive 
the rulers, but will at any rate deceive the rest of the city. This 
"lie" is set forth in considerable detail. The most important part 
of it is the dogma that God has created men of three kinds, the 
best made of gold/ the second best of silver, and the common 
1 Se^ Henry C. 1-ca, A History of Sacerdotal Celibacy. 

133 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

herd of brass and iron. Those made of gold are fit to be guardians ; 
those made of silver should be soldiers; the others should do the 
manual work. Usually, but by no means always, children will 
belong to the same grade as their parents ; when they do not, they 
must be promoted or degraded accordingly. It is thought hardly 
possible to make the present generation believe this myth, but the 
next, and all subsequent generations, can be so educated as not 
to doubt it 

Plato is right in thinking that belief in this myth could be 
generated in two generations. The Japanese have been taught 
since 1868 that the Mikado is descended from the sun-goddess, 
and that Japan was created earlier than the rest of the world. Any 
university professor, who, even in a learned work, throws doubt 
on these dogmas, is dismissed for un-Japanese activities. What 
Plato does not seem to realize is that the compulsory acceptance 
of such myths is incompatible with philosophy, and involves a 
kind of education which stunts intelligence. 

The definition of "justice/ 1 which is the nominal goal of the 
whole discussion, is reached in Book IV. It consists, we are told, 
in everybody doing his own work and not being a busybody: the 
city is /urt when trader, auxiliary, and guardian, each does his 
own job without interfering with that of other classes. 

That everybody should mind his own business is no doubt an 
admirable precept, but it hardly corresponds to what a modern 
would naturally call "justice." The Greek word so translated 
corresponded to a concept which was very important in Greek 
thought, but for which we have no exact equivalent. It is worth 
while to recall what Anaximander said: 

Into that from which things take their rise they pass away once 
more, as is ordained; for they make reparation and satisfaction to 
one another for their injustice according to the appointed time. 

Before philosophy began, the Greeks had a theory or feeling 
about the universe, which may be called religious or ethical. 
According to this theory, every person and every thing has his 
or its appointed place and appointed function. This does not 
depend upon the fiat of Zeus, for Zeus himself is subject to the 
same kind of law as governs others. The theory is connected with 
the idea of fate or necessity. It applies emphatitally to the heavenly 
bodies. But where there is vigour, there is a tendency to overstep 

'34 



PLATO'S UTOPIA 

just bounds; hence arises strife. Some kind of impersonal super- 
Olympian law punishes hubris, and restores the eternal order 
which the aggressor sought to violate. This whole outlook, ori- 
ginally, perhaps, scarcely conscious, passed over into philosophy; 
it is to be found alike in cosmologies of strife, such as those of 
Heraclitus and Empedoclea, and in monistic doctrines such as 
that of Parmenides. It is the source of the belief both in natural 
and in human law, and it clearly underlies Plato's conception of 
justice. 

The word "justice," as still used in the law, is more similar to 
Plato's conception than it is as used in political speculation. Under 
the influence of democratic theory, we have come to associate 
justice with equality : while for Plato it has no such implication. 
"Justice," in the sense in which it is almost synonymous with 
"law" as when we speak of "courts of justice" is concerned 
mainly with property rights, which have nothing to do with 
equality. The first suggested definition of "justice," at the be- 
ginning of the Republic, is that it consists in paying debts. This 
definition is soon abandoned as inadequate, but something of it 
remains at the end. 

There are several points to be noted about Plato's definition. 
First, it makes it possible to have inequalities of power and 
privilege without injustice. The guardians are to have all the power, 
because they are the wisest members of the community; injustice 
would only occur, on Plato's definition, if there were men in the 
other classes who were wiser than some of the guardians. That is 
why Plato provides for promotion and degradation of citizens, 
although he thinks that the double advantage of birth and edu- 
cation will, in most cases, make the children of guardians superior 
to the children of others. If there were a more exact science of 
government, and more certainty of men following its precepts, 
there would be much to be said for Plato's system. No one thinks 
it unjust to put the best men into a football team, although they 
acquire thereby a great superiority. If football were managed as 
democratically as the Athenian government the students to play 
for their university would be chosen by lot. But in matters of 
government it is difficult to know who has the most skill, and 
very far from certain that a politician will use his skill in the 
public interest rather than in his own or in that of his class or 
party or crcfd. 

135 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The next point is that Plato's definition of "justice" presup- 
poses a State organized either on traditional lines, or, like his own, 
so as to realize, in its totality, some ethical ideal. Justice, we are 
told, consists in every man doing his own job. But what is a man's 
job? In a State which, like ancient Egypt or the kingdom of the 
Incas, remains unchanged generation after generation, a man's 
job is his father's job, and no question arises. But in Plato's State 
no man has any legal father. His job, therefore, must be decided 
either by his own tastes or by the State's judgment as to his 
aptitudes. The latter is obviously what Plato would desire. But 
some kinds of work, though highly skilled, may be deemed 
pernicious ; Plato takes this view of poetry, and I should take it 
of the work of Napoleon. The purposes of the Government, 
therefore, are essential in determining what is a man's job. Al- 
though all the rulers are to be philosophers, there are to be no 
innovations: a philosopher is to be, for all time, a man who 
understands and agrees with Plato. 

When we ask: what will Plato's Republic achieve ? the answer 
is rather humdrum. It will achieve success in wars against roughly 
equal populations, and it will secure a livelihood for a certain 
small number of people. It will almost certainly produce no art 
or science, because of its rigidity; in this respect, as in others, 
it will be like Sparta. In spite of all the fine talk, skill in war and 
enough to eat is all that will be achieved. Plato had lived through 
famine and defeat in Athens; perhaps, subconsciously, he thought 
the avoidance of these evils the best that statesmanship could 
accomplish. 

A Utopia, if seriously intended, obviously must embody the 
ideals of its creator. Let us consider, for a moment, what we can 
mean by "ideals." In the first place, they are desired by those 
who believe in them; but they are not desired quite in the same- 
way as a man desires personal comforts, such as food and shelter. 
What makes the difference between an "ideal" and an ordinary 
object of desire is that the former is impersonal ; it is something 
having (at least ostensibly) no special reference to the ego of the 
man who feels the desire, and therefore capable, theoretically, 
of being desired by everybody. Thus we might define an "ideal" 
as something desired, not egocentric, and such that the person 
desiring it wishes that every one else also deiircd it. I may wish 
that everybody had enough to eat, that everybody felt kindly 

36 



PLATO'S UTOPIA 

towards everybody, and so on, and if I wish anything of this 
kind I shall also wish others to wish it. In this way, I can build 
up what looks like an impersonal ethic, although in fact it rests 
upon the personal basis of my own desires for the desire remains 
mine, even when what is desired has no reference to myself. 
For example, one man may wish that everybody understood 
science, and another that everybody appreciated an; it is a per- 
sonal difference between the two men that produces this difference 
in their desires. 

The personal element becomes apparent as soon as controversy 
is involved. Suppose some man says: "You are wrong to wish 
everybody to be happy; you ought to desire the happiness of 
Germans and the unhappiness of everyone else." Here "ought" 
may be taken to mean that that is what the speaker wishes me 
to desire. I might retort that, not being German, it is psychologi- 
cally impossible for me to desire the unhappiness of all non- 
Germans ; but this answer seems inadequate. 

Again, there may be a conflict of purely impersonal ideals. 
Nietzsche's hero differs from a Christian saint, yet both are 
impersonally admired, the one by Nietzscheans, the other by 
Christians. How are we to decide between the two except by 
means of our own desires? Yet, if there is nothing further, an 
ethical disagreement can only be decided by emotional appeals, 
or by force in the ultimate resort, by war. On questions of 
fact, we can appeal to science and scientific methods of obser- 
vation; but on ultimate questions of ethics there seems to be 
nothing analogous. Yet, if this is really the case, ethical disputes 
resolve themselves into contests for power including propaganda 
power. 

This point of view, in a crude form, is put forth in the first 
book of the Republic by Thrasymachus, who, like almost all the 
characters in Plato's dialogues, was a real person. He was a 
Sophist from Chalcedon. and a famous teacher of rhetoric; he 
appeared in the first comedy of Aristophanes, 427 B.C. After 
Socrates has, for some time, been amiably discussing justice with 
an old man named Cephalus, and with Plato's elder brothers 
Glaucon and Adeimantus, Thrasymachus, who has been listening 
with growing impatience, breaks in with a vehement protest 
against such childish nonsense. He proclaims emphatically that 
"justice is lathing else than the interest of the stronger." 

'37 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

This point of view is refuted by Socrates with quibbles; it is 
never fairly faced. It raises the fundamental question in ethics 
and politics, namely: Is there any standard of "good" and "bad," 
except what the man using these words desires ? If there is not, 
many of the consequences drawn by Thrasymachus seem unes- 
capable. Yet how are we to say that there is ? 

At this point, religion has, at first sight, a simple answer. God 
determines what is good and what bad ; the man whose will is in 
harmony with the will of God is a good man. Yet this answer is 
not quite orthodox. Theologians say that God is good, and this 
implies that there is a standard of goodness which is independent 
of God's will. We are thus forced to face the question: Is there 
objective truth or falsehood in such a statement as "pleasure 
is good/' in the same sense as in such a statement as "snow is 
white"? 

To answer this question, a very long discussion would be 
necessary. Some may think that we can, for practical purposes, 
evade the fundamental issue, and say: "I do not know what is 
meant by 'objective truth,' but I shall consider a statement 'true* 
if all, or virtually all, of those who have investigated it are agreed 
in upholding it." In this sense, it is "true" that snow is white. 
that Caesar was assassinated, that water is composed of hydrogen 
and oxygen, and so on. \Ve are then faced with a question of fact: 
are there any similarly agreed statements in ethics? If there arc, 
they can be made the basis both for rules of private conduct, 
and for a theory of politics. If there are not, we are driven in 
practice, whatever may be the philosophic truth, to a contest by 
force or propaganda or both, whenever an irreconcilable ethical 
difference exists between powerful groups. 

For Plato, this question does not really exist. Although his 
dramatic sense leads him to state the position of Thrasymachus 
forcibly, he is quite unaware of its strength, and allows himself 
to be grossly unfair in arguing against it. Plato is convinced that 
there is "the Good," and that its nature can be ascertained; 
when people disagree about it, one, at least, is making an intel- 
lectual, error just as much as if the disagreement were a scientific 
one on some matter of fact. 

The difference between Plato and Thrasymachus is very impor- 
tant, but for the historian of philosophy it is one to be only noted, 
not decided. Plato thinks he can prove that his ideal ^Republic is 

138 



PLATO'S UTOPIA 

good ; a democrat who accepts the objectivity of ethics may think 
that he can prove the Republic bad; but anyone who agrees with 
Thrasymachus will say: "There is no question of proving or 
disproving; the only question is whether you like the kind of State 
that Plato desires. If you do, it is good for you ; if you do not, 
it is bad for you. If many do and many do not, the decision cannot 
be made by reason, but only by force, actual or concealed." This 
is one of the issues in philosophy that are still open ; on each side 
there are men who command respect. But for a very long time 
the opinion that Plato advocated remained almost undisputed. 

It should be observed, further, that the view which substi- 
tutes the consensus of opinion for an objective standard has 
certain consequences that few would accept. What are we to say 
of scientific innovators like Galileo, who advocate an opinion 
with which few agree, but finally win the support of almost 
everybody? They do so by means of arguments, not by emotional 
appeals or state propaganda or the use of force. This implies 
a criterion other than the general opinion. In ethical matters, 
there is something analogous in the case of the great religious 
teachers. Christ taught that it is not wrong to pluck ears of corn 
on the Sabbath, but that it is wrong to hate your enemies. Such 
ethical innovations obviously imply some standard other than 
majority opinion, but the standard, whatever it is, is not objective 
fact, as in a scientific question. This problem is a difficult one, 
and I do not profess to be able to solve it. For the present, let us 
be content to note it. 

Plato's Republic, unlike modern Utopias, was perhaps intended 
to be actually founded. This was not so fantastic or impossible as 
it might naturally seem to us. Many of its provisions, including 
some that we should have thought quite impracticable, were 
actually realized at Sparta. The rule of philosophers had been 
attempted by Pythagoras, and in Plato's time Archytas the 
Pythagorean was politically influential in Taras (the modern 
Taranto) when Plato visited Sicily and southern Italy. It was 
a common practice for cities to employ a sage to draw up their 
laws; Solon had done this for Athens, and Protagoras for Thurii. 
Colonies, in those days, were completely free from control by 
their parent cities, and it would have been quite feasible for a 
band of Platonists to establish the Republic on the shores of Spain 
or Gaul. Unfortunately chance led Plato to Syracuse, a great 

139 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

commercial city engaged in desperate wars with Cartilage; in 
such an atmosphere, no philosopher could have achieved much. 
In the next generation, the rise of Macedonia had made all small 
States antiquated, and had brought about the futility of all 
political experiments in miniature. 



140 



Chapter XV 
THE THEORY OF IDEAS 

E I 1HE middle of the Republic, from the later part of Book V 

I to the end of Book VII, is occupied mainly with questions 

JL of pure philosophy, as opposed to politics. These questions 

are introduced by a somewhat abrupt statement: 

Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this . 
world have the spirit and power of philosophy, and political great- 
ness and wisdom meet in one, and those commoner natures who 
pursue either to the exclusion of the other are compelled to stand 
aside, cities will never have rest from these evils no, nor the 
human race, as I believe and then only will this our State have 
a possibility of life and behold the light of day. 

If this is true, we must decide what constitutes a philosopher, 
and what we mean by "philosophy." The consequent discussion 
is the most famous part of the Republic, and has perhaps been the 
most influential. It has, in parts, extraordinary literary beauty; 
the reader may disagree (as 1 do) with what is said, but cannot 
help being moved by it. 

Plato's philosophy rests on the distinction between reality and 
appearance, which was first set forth by Parmenides; throughout 
the discussion with which we are now concerned, Parmenidean 
phrases and arguments are constantly recurring. There is, however, 
a religious tone about reality, which is rather Pythagorean than 
Parmenidean ; and there is much about mathematics and music 
which is directly traceable to the disciples of Pythagoras. This 
combination of the logic of Parmenides with the other- worldliness 
of Pythagoras and the Orphics produced a doctrine which was 
felt to be satisfying to both the intellect and the religious emo- 
tions ; the result was a very powerful synthesis, which, with various 
modifications, influenced most of the great philosophers, down 
to and including Hegel. But not only philosophers were influenced 
by Plato. Why did the Puritans object to the music ag^^fiSUl 
and gorgeous ritual of the Catholic Church ? Yoy^ff3u|VnSh<M)| 

M^r \ ^^'*^*4^ 

answer in the tenth book of the Republic. \V\\wG*p> pMtoren 11 
school compelled no learn arithmetic? The re^gnf/fire given ii 
the seventh book. 

141 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The following paragraphs summarize Plato's theory of ideas. 
Our question is: What is a philosopher? The first answer is in 
accordance with the etymology : a philosopher is a lover of wisdom. 
But this is not the same thing as a lover of knowledge, in the sense 
in which an inquisitive man may be said to love knowledge ; vulgar 
curiosity does not make a philosopher. The definition is therefore 
amended : the philosopher is a man who loves the " vision of truth." 
But what is this vision ? 

Consider a man who loves beautiful things, who makes a point 
of being present at new tragedies, seeing new pictures, and hearing 
new music. Such a man is not a philosopher, because he loves 
only beautiful things, whereas the philosopher loves beauty in 
itself. The man who only loves beautiful things is dreaming, 
whereas the man who knows absolute beauty is wide awake. 
The former has only opinion ; the latter has knowledge. 

What is the difference between "knowledge" and ''opinion"? 
The man who has knowledge has knowledge of sometliing, that 
is to say, of something that exists, for what does not exist is 
nothing. (This is reminiscent of Parmenides.) Thus knowledge 
is infallible, since it is logically impossible for it to be mistaken. 
But opinion can be mistaken. How can this be? Opinion cannot 
be of what is not, for that is impossible ; nor of what is, for then 
it would be knowledge. Therefore opinion must be of what both 
is and is not. 

But how is this possible ? The answer is that particular things 
always partake of opposite characters: what is beautiful is also, 
in some respects, ugly; what is just is, in some respects, unjust; 
and so on. All particular sensible objects, so Plato contends, have 
this contradictory character; they are thus intermediate between 
being and not-being, and are suitable as objects of opinion, but 
not of knowledge. "But those who see the absolute and eternal 
and immutable may be said to know, and not to have opinion only." 
Thus we arrive at the conclusion that opinion is of the world 
presented to the senses, whereas knowledge is of a super-sensible 
eternal world; for instance, opinion is concerned with particular 
beautiful things, but knowledge is concerned with beauty in 
itself. 

The only argument advanced is that it is self-contradictory to 
suppose that a thing can be both beautiful and not beautiful, or 

both just and not just, and that nevertheless particular things 

f 
142 



THE THEORY OF IDEAS 

seem to combine such contradictory characters. Therefore par- 
ticular things are not real. Heraclitus had said "We step and do 
not step into the same rivers; we are and are not." By combining 
this with Parmenides we arrive at Plato's result. 

There is, however, something of great importance in Plato's 
doctrine which is not traceable to his predecessors, and that is 
the theory of "ideas" or "forms." This theory is partly logical, 
partly metaphysical. The logical part has to do with the meaning 
of general words. There are many individual animals of whom we 
can truly say "this is a cat." What do we mean by the word "cat" ? 
Obviously something different from each particular cat. An 
animal is a cat, it would seem, because it participates in a general 
nature common to all cats. Language cannot get on without 
general words such as "cat," and such words are evidently not 
meaningless. But if the word "cat" means anything, it means 
something which is not this or that cat, but some kind of universal 
cattiness. This is not born when a particular cat is born, and 
does not die when it dies. In fact, it has no position in space or 
time; it is "eternal." This is the logical part of the doctrine. 
The arguments in its favour, whether ultimately valid or not, are 
strong, and quite independent of the metaphysical part of the 
doctrine. 

According to the metaphysical part of the doctrine, the word 
"cat" means a certain ideal cat, "the cat," created by God, and 
unique. Particular cats partake of the nature of the cat, but more 
or less imperfectly; it is only owing to this imperfection that 
there can be many of them. The cat is real ; particular cats are 
only apparent. 

In the last book of the Republic, as a preliminary to a condemna- 
tion of painters, there is a very clear exposition of the doctrine of 
ideas or forms. 

Here Plato explains that, whenever a number of individuals 
have a common name, they have also a common "idea" or "form." 
For instance, though there are many beds, there is only one 
"idea" or. "form" of a bed. Just as a reflection of a bed in a mirror 
is only apparent and not "real," so the various particular beds 
are unreal, being only copies of the "idea," which is the one real 
bed, and is made by God. Of this one bed, made by God, there 
cm be knowledge, but in respect of the many beds made by 
carpenters there can be only opinion. The philosopher, as such, 

'43 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

will be interested only in the one ideal bed, not in the many beds 
found in the sensible world. He will have a certain indifference 
to ordinary mundane affairs: "how can he who has magnificence 
of mind and is the spectator of all time and all existence, think 
much of human life?" The youth who is capable of becoming 
a philosopher will be distinguished among his fellows as just and 
gentle, fond of learning, possessed of a good memory and a 
naturally harmonious mind. Such a one shall be educated into 
a philosopher and a guardian. 

At this point Adeimantus breaks in with a protest. When he tries 
to argue with Socrates, he says, he feels himself led a little astray 
at each step, until, in the end, all his former notions are turned 
upside down. But whatever Socrates may say, it remains the case, 
as any one can see, that people who stick to philosophy become 
strange monsters, not to say utter rogues ; even the best of them 
are made useless by philosophy. 

Socrates admits that this is true in the world as it is, but main- 
tains that it is the other people who are to blame, not the philo- 
sophers; in a wise community the philosophers would not seem 
foolish; it is only among fools that the wise are judged to be 
destitute of wisdom. 

What are we to do in this dilemma ? There were to have been 
two ways of inaugurating our Republic: by philosophers becoming 
rulers, or by rulers becoming philosophers. The first way seems 
impossible as a beginning, because in a city not already philo- 
sophic the philosophers are unpopular. But a born prince might 
be a philosopher, and "one is enough; let there be one man who 
has a city obedient to his will, and he might bring into existence 
the ideal polity about which the world is so incredulous." Plato 
hoped that he had found such a prince in the younger Dionysius, 
tyrant of Syracuse, but the young man turned out disappointingly. 
In the sixth and seventh books of the Republic, Plato is concerned 
with two questions: First, what is philosophy? Second, how can a 
young man or woman, of suitable temperament, be so educated 
as to become a philosopher ? 

Philosophy, for Plato, is a kind of vision, the "vision of truth." 
It is not purely intellectual ; it is not merely wisdom, but low of 
wisdom. Spinoza's "intellectual love of God" is much the same 
intimate union of thought and feeling. Every 6ne who has done 
any kind of creative work has experienced, in a greater or less 

144 



THE THEORY OP IDEAS 

degree, the state of mind in which, after long labour, truth or 
beauty appears, or seems to appear, in a sudden glory it may 
be only about some small matter, or it may be about the universe. 
The experience is, at the moment, very convincing; doubt may 
come later, but at the time there is utter certainty. I think most 
of the best creative work, in art, in science, in literature, and in 
philosophy, has been the result of such a moment. Whether it 
comes to others as to me, I cannot say. For my pan, I have found 
that, when I wish to write a book on some subject, I must first 
soak myself in detail, until all the separate parts of the subject- 
matter are familiar; then, some day, if I am fortunate, I perceive 
the whole, with all its parts duly interrelated. After that, I only 
have to write down what I have seen. The nearest analogy is 
first walking all over a mountain in a mist, until every path and 
ridge and valley is separately familiar, and then, from a distance, 
seeing the mountain whole and clear in bright sunshine. 

This experience, I believe, is necessary to good creative work, 
but it is not sufficient; indeed the subjective certainty that it 
brings with it may be fatally misleading. William James describes 
a man who got the experience from laughing-gas; whenever he 
was under its influence, he knew the secret of the universe, but 
when he came to, he had forgotten it. At last, with immense 
effort, he wrote down the secret before the vision had faded. 
When completely recovered, he rushed to see what he had written. 
It was: "A smell of petroleum prevails throughout." What seems 
like sudden insight may be misleading, and must be tested soberly, 
when the divine intoxication has passed. 

Plato's vision, which he completely trusted at the time when he 
wrote the Republic, needs ultimately the help of a parable, 
the parable of the cave, in order to convey its nature to the 
reader. Rut it is led up to by various preliminary discussions, 
designed to make the reader see the necessity of the world of 
ideas. 

First, the world of the intellect is distinguished from the world 
of the senses ; then intellect and sense-perception are in turn each 
divided into two kinds. The two kinds of sense-perception need 
not concern us ; the two kinds of intellect are called, respectively, 
"reason" and "understanding." Of these, reason is the higher 
kind ; it is concerned with pure ideas, and its method is dialectic. 
Understanding is the kind of intellect that is used in mathematics; 

45 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

it is inferior to reason in that it uses hypotheses which it cannot 
test. In geometry, for example, we say: "Let ABC be a rectilinear 
triangle." It is against the rules to ask whether ABC really is 
a rectilinear triangle, although, if it is a figure that we have drawn, 
we may be sure that it is not, because we can't draw absolutely 
straight lines. Accordingly, mathematics can never tell us what u, 
but only what would be if. ... There are no straight lines in the 
sensible world; therefore, if mathematics is to have more than 
hypothetical truth, we must find evidence for the existence of 
super-sensible straight lines in a super-sensible world. This 
cannot be done by the understanding, but according to Plato 
it can be done by reason, which shows that there is a rectilinear 
triangle in heaven, of which geometrical propositions can be 
affirmed categorically, not hypothetically. 

There is, at this point, a difficulty which did not escape Plato's 
notice, and was evident to modern idealistic philosophers. 
We saw that God made only one bed, and it would he natural 
to suppose that he made only one straight line. But if there is a 
heavenly triangle, he must have made at least three straight lines. 
Theobjects of geometry, though ideal, must exist in manycxamples ; 
we need the possibility of two intersecting circles , and so on. 
This suggests that geometry, on Plato's theory, should not be 
capable of ultimate truth, but should be condemned as part of 
the study of appearance. We will, however, ignore this point, 
as to which Plato's answer is somewhat obscure. 

Plato seeks to explain the difference between clear intellectual 
vision and the confused vision of sense-perception by an analogy 
from the sense of sight. Sight, he says, differs from the other senses, 
since it requires not only the eye and the object, hut also light. 
We see clearly objects on which the sun shines: in twilight we 
see confusedly, and in pitch-darkness not at all. Now the world 
of ideas is what we see when the object is illumined by the sun, 
while the world of passing things is a confused twilight world. 
The eye is compared to the soul, and the sun, as the source of 
light, to truth or goodness. 

The soul is like an eye: when resting upon that on which truth 
and being shine, the soul perceives and understands, and is radiant 
with intelligence; but when turned towards the twilight of be- 
coming and perishing, then she has opinion onfy, and goes blinking 
about, and is first of one opinion and then of another, and seems to 

146 



THE THEORY OP IDEAS 

have no intelligence. . . . Now what imparts truth to the known 
and the power of knowing to the knower is what I would have 
you term the idea of good, and this you will deem to be the cause 
of science. 

This leads up to the famous simile of the cave or den, according 
to which those who are destitute of philosophy may be compared 
to prisoners in a cave, who are only able to look in one direction 
because they are bound, and who have a fire behind them and 
a wall in front. Between them and the wall there is nothing; 
all that they see are shadows of themselves, and of objects behind 
them, cast on the wall by the light of the fire. Inevitably they 
regard these shadows as real, and have no notion of the objects 
to which they are due. At last some man succeeds in escaping 
from the cave to the light of the sun ; for the first time he sees 
real things, and becomes aware that he had hitherto been deceived 
by shadows. If he is the sort of philosopher who is fit to become 
a guardian, he will feel it his duty to those who were formerly 
his fellow-prisoners to go down again into the cave, instruct 
them as to the truth, and show them the way up. But he will have 
difficulty in persuading them, because, coming out of the sunlight, 
he will sec shadows less clearly than they do, and will seem to 
them stupider than before his escape. 

"And now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our nature is 
enlightened or unenlightened : Behold! human beings living in 
an underground den, which has a mouth open toward the light 
and reaching all along the den; here they have been from their 
childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they 
cannot move, and can only see before them, being prevented by 
the chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind 
them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the 
prisoners there is a raised way ; and you will see, if you look, a low 
wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette players 
have in front of them, over which they show the puppets. 

"I see. 

"And do you sec, I said, men passing along the wall carrying all 
sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of wood 
and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall ? Some 
of them arc talking, others silent. 

"You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange 
prisoners. 

14 Like ourselves, I replied ; and they see only their own shadows, 

147 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the 
opposite wall of the cave." 

The position of the good in Plato's philosophy is peculiar. 
Science and truth, he says, are like the good, but the good has 
a higher place. "The good is not essence, but far exceeds essence 
in dignity and power." Dialectic leads to the end of the intellectual 
world in the perception of the absolute good. It is by means of 
the good that dialectic is able to dispense with the hypotheses of 
the mathematician. The underlying assumption is that reality, 
as opposed to appearance, is completely and perfectly good; 
to perceive the good, therefore, is to perceive reality. Throughout 
Plato's philosophy there is the same fusion of intellect and mysti- 
cism as in Pythagoreanism, but at this final culmination mysticism 
clearly has the upper hand. 

Plato's doctrine of ideas contains a number of obvious errors. 
But in spite of these it marks a very important advance in philo- 
sophy, since it is the first theory to emphasize the problem of 
universal, which, in varying forms, has persisted to the present 
day. Beginnings are apt to be crude, but their originality should 
not be overlooked on this account. Something remains of what 
Plato had to say, even after all necessary corrections have been 
made. The absolute minimum of what remains, even in the view 
of those most hostile to Plato, is this: that we cannot express 
ourselves in a language composed wholly of proper names, but 
must have also general words such as "man," "dog," "cat"; 
or, if not these, then relational words such as "similar," "before," 
and so on. Such words are not meaningless noises, and it is 
difficult to see how they can have meaning if the world consists en- 
tirely of particular things, such as are designated by proper 
names. There may be ways of getting round this argument, but 
at any rate it affords a prima facie case in favour of universal*. 
I shall provisionally accept it as in some degree valid. But when 
so much is granted, the rest of what Plato says by no means 
follows. 

In the first place, Plato has no understanding of philosophical 
syntax. I can say "Socrates is human," "Plato is human," and 
so on. In all these statements, it may be assumed that the word 
"human" has exactly the same meaning. But whatever it means, 
it means something which is not of the same kind as Socrates, 

-48 



THE THEORY OF IDEAS 

Plato, and the rest of the individuals who compose the human 
race. "Human" is an adjective; it would be nonsense to say 
"human is human." Plato makes a mistake analogous to saying 
"human is human." He thinks that beauty is beautiful; he thinks 
that the universal "man" is the name of a pattern man created 
by God, of whom actual men are imperfect and somewhat unreal 
copies. He fails altogether to realize how great is the gap between 
universals and particulars; his "ideas" are really just other par- 
ticulars, ethically and aesthetically superior to the ordinary kind* 
He himself, at a later date, began to see this difficulty, as appears 
in the Parmenides, which contains one of the most remarkable 
cases in history of self-criticism by a philosopher. 

The Parmenides is supposed to be related by Antiphon (Plato's 
half-brother), who alone remembers the conversation, but is 
now only interested in horses. They find him carrying a bridle, 
and with difficulty persuade him to relate the famous discussion 
between Parmenides, Zeno, and Socrates. This, we are told, took 
place when Parmenides was old (about sixty-five), Zeno in middle 
life (about forty), and Socrates quite a young man. Socrates 
expounds the theory of ideas; he is sure that there are ideas of 
likeness, justices beauty, and goodness; he is not sure that there 
is an idea of man ; and he rejects with indignation the suggestion 
that there could be ideas of such things as hair and mud and 
dirt though, he adds, there are times when he thinks that there 
is nothing without an idea. He runs away from this view because 
he is afraid of falling into a bottomless pit of nonsense. 

"Yes, Socrates, said Parmenides; that is because you are still 
young ; the time will come, if I am not mistaken, when philosophy 
will have a firmer grasp of you, and then you will not despise 
even the meanest things/' 

Socrates agrees that, in his view, "There are certain ideas of 
which ail other things partake, and from which they derive their 
names; that similars, for example, become similar, because they 
partake of similarity; and great things become great, because 
they partake of greatness; and that just and beautiful things 
become just and beautiful, because they partake of justice and 
beauty." 

Parmenides proceeds to raise difficulties, (a) Does the individual 
partake of the wh<fle idea, or only of a part ? To either view there 
are objections. If the former, one thing is in many places at once; 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

if the latter, the idea is divisible, and a thing which has a part of 
smallness will be smaller than absolute smallness, which is absurd. 
(b) When an individual partakes of an idea, the individual and 
the idea are similar; therefore there will have to be another idea, 
embracing both the particulars and the original idea. And there 
will have to be yet another, embracing the particulars and the 
two ideas, and so on ad mfintium. Thus every idea, instead of 
being one, becomes an infinite series of ideas. (This is the same 
as Aristotle's argument of the "third man.") (c) Socrates suggests 
that perhaps ideas are only thoughts, but Parmenides points 
out that thoughts must be of something, (d) Ideas cannot resemble 
the particulars that partake of them, for the reason given in (b) 
above. (*) Ideas, if there are any, must be unknown to us, because 
our knowledge is not absolute. (/) If God's knowledge is absolute, 
He will not know us, and therefore cannot rule us. 

Nevertheless, the theory of ideas is not wholly abandoned. 
Without ideas, Socrates says, there will be nothing on which the 
mind can rest, and therefore reasoning will be destroyed. Par* 
menides tells him that his troubles come of lack of previous 
training, but no definite conclusion is reached. 

I do not think that Plato's logical objections to the reality of 
sensible particulars will bear examination. He says, for example, 
that whatever is beautiful is also in some respects ugly; what is 
double is also half; and so on. But when we say of some work of 
art that it is beautiful in some respects and ugly in others, analysis 
will always (at least theoretically) enable us to say "this part or 
aspect is beautiful, while that part or aspect is ugly." And as 
regards "double" and "half," these are relative terms; there is 
no contradiction in the fact that 2 is double of i and half of 4. 
Plato is perpetually getting into trouble through not understanding 
relative terms. He thinks that if A is greater than B and less than 
C, then A is at once great and small, which seems to him a contra- 
diction. Such troubles are among the infantile diseases of philo- 
sophy. 

The distinction between reality and appearance cannot have 
the consequences attributed to it by Parmenides and Plato and 
Hegel. If appearance really appears, it is not nothing, and is 
therefore pan of reality; this is an argument of the correct Par- 
menidean sort. If appearance does not really appear, why trouble 
our heads about it? But perhaps some one will say: "Appearance 

150 



THE THEORY OF IDEAS 

does not really appear, but it appears to appear." This will not 
help, for we shall ask again: "Does it really appear to appear, 
or only apparently appear to appear?" Sooner or later, if appear- 
ance is even to appear to appear, we must reach something that 
really appears, and is therefore part of reality. Plato would not 
dream of denying that there appear to be many beds, although 
there is only one real bed, namely the one made by God. But 
he does not seem to have faced the implications of the fact that 
there are many appearances, and that this many-ness is part of 
reality. Any attempt to divide the world into portions, of which 
one is more "real" than the other, is doomed to failure. 

Connected with this is another curious view of Plato's, that 
knowledge and opinion must be concerned with different subject- 
matters. We should say: If I think it is going to snow, that is 
opinion; if later I see it snowing, that is knowledge; but the 
subject-matter is the same on both occasions. Plato, however, 
thinks that what can at any time be a matter ot opinion can never 
be a matter of knowledge. Knowledge is certain and infallible; 
opinion is not merely fallible, but is necessarily mistaken, since it 
assumes the reality of what is only appearance. All this repeats 
what had been said by Parmenides. 

There is one respect in which Plato's metaphysic is apparently 
different from that of Parmenides. For Parmenides there is only 
the One; for Plato, there are many ideas. There are not only 
beauty, truth, and goodness, but, as we saw, there is the heavenly 
bed, created by God; there is a heavenly man, a heavenly dog, 
a heavenly cat, and so on through a whole Noah's ark. All this 
however, seems, in the Republic , to have been not adequately 
thought out. A Platonic idea or form is not a thought, thougk it 
may be the object of a thought. It is difficult to see how God 
can have created it, since its being is timeless, and he could not 
have decided to create a bed unless his thought, when he decided, 
had had for its object that very Platonic bed which we are told 
he brought into existence. What is timeless must be uncreated. 
We come here to a difficulty which has troubled many philosophic 
theologians. Only the contingent world, the world in space and 
time, can have been created; but this is the everyday world which 
has been condemned as illusory and also bad. Therefore the 
Creator, it would* seem, created only illusion and evil. Some 
Gnostics \vere so consistent as to adopt this view; but in Plato 

'5* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the difficulty is still below the surface, and he seems, in the Repub- 
lic, to have never become aware of it. 

The philosopher who is to be a guardian must, according to 
Plato, return into the cave, and live among those who have never 
seen the sun of truth. It would seem that God Himself, if He 
wishes to amend His creation, must do likewise; a Christian 
Platonist might so interpret the Incarnation. But it remains 
completely impossible to explain why God was not content 
with the world of ideas. The philosopher finds the cave in existence, 
and is actuated by benevolence in returning to it ; but the Creator, 
if He created everything, might, one would think, have avoided 
the cave altogether. 

Perhaps this difficulty arises only from the Christian notion 
of a Creator, and is not chargeable to Plato, who says that God 
did not create everything, but only what is good. The multiplicity 
of the sensible world, on this view, would have some other source 
than God. And the ideas would, perhaps, be not so much created 
by God as constituents of His essence. The apparent pluralism 
involved in the multiplicity of ideas would thus not be ultimate. 
Ultimately there is only God, or the Good, to whom the ideas are 
adjectival. This, at any rate, is a possible interpretation of Plato. 
Plato proceeds to an interesting sketch of the education proper 
to a young man who is to be a guardian. We saw that the young 
man is selected for this honour on the ground of a combination of 
intellectual and moral qualities; he must be just and gentle, fond 
of learning, with a good memory and a harmonious mind. The 
young man who has been chosen for these merits will spend the 
years from twenty to thirty on the four Pythagorean studies: 
arithmetic, geometry (plane and solid), astronomy, and harmony. 
These studies are not to be pursued in any utilitarian spirit, but 
in order to prepare his mind for the vision of eternal things. In 
astronomy, for example, he is not to trouble himself too much 
about the actual heavenly bodies, but rather with the mathematics 
of the motion of ideal heavenly bodies. This may sound absurd to 
modern ears, but, strange to say, it proved to be a fruitful point 
of view in connection with empirical astronomy. The way this 
came about is curious, and worth considering. 

The apparent motions of the planets, until they have been 
very profoundly analysed, appear to be irregular and complicated, 
and not at all such &* a Pythagorean Creator would tyvc chosen. 

152 



THE THEORY OF IDEAS 

It was obvious to every Greek that the heavens ought to exemplify 
mathematical beauty, which would only be the case if the planets 
moved in circles. This would be especially evident to Plato, 
owing to his emphasis on the good. The problem thus arose: is 
there any hypothesis which will reduce the apparent disorderliness 
of planetary motions to order and beauty and simplicity? If 
there is, the idea of the good will justify us in asserting this 
hypothesis. Aristarchus of Samos found such a hypothesis: that 
all the planets, including the earth, go round the sun in circles. 
This view was rejected for two thousand years, partly on the 
authority of Aristotle, who attributes a rather similar hypothesis 
to "the Pythagoreans" (De Coelo, 293 a). It was revived by 
Copernicus, and its success might seem to justify Plato's aesthetic 
bias in astronomy. Unfortunately, however, Kepler discovered 
that the planets move in ellipses, not in circles, with the sun 
at a focus, not at the centre; then Newton discovered that they 
do not move even in exact ellipses. And so the geometrical sim- 
plicity sought by Plato, and apparently found by Aristarchus of 
Samos, proved in the end illusory. 

This piece of scientific history illustrates a general maxim : that 
any hypothesis, however absurd, may be useful in science, if it 
enables a discoverer to conceive things in a new way; but that, 
when it has served this purpose by luck, it is likely to become an 
obstacle to further advance. The belief in the good as the key to 
the scientific understanding of the world was useful, at a certain 
stage, in astronomy, but at every later stage it was harmful. The 
ethical and aesthetic bias of Plato, and still more of Aristotle, 
did much to kill Greek science. 

It is noteworthy that modern Platonists, with few exceptions, 
are ignorant of mathematics, in spite of the immense importance 
that Plato attached to arithmetic and geometry, and the immense 
influence that they had on his philosophy. This is an example 
of the evils of specialization: a man must not write on Plato unless 
he has spent so much of his youth on Greek as to have had no 
time for the things that Plato thought important. 



'53 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

I have good hope that there is yet something remaining for the 
dead, some far better thing for the good than for the evil." 

Death, says Socrates, is the separation of soul and body. Here 
we come under Plato's dualism: between reality and appearance, 
ideas and sensible objects, reason and sense-perception, soul and 
body. These pairs are connected: the first in each pair is superior 
to the second both in reality and in goodness. An ascetic morality 
was the natural consequence of this dualism. Christianity adopted 
this doctrine in part, but never wholly. There were two obstacles. 
The first was that the creation of the visible world, if Plato was 
right, might seem to have been an evil deed, and therefore the 
Creator could not be good. The second was that orthodox Christi- 
anity could never bring itself to condemn marriage, though it 
held celibacy to be nobler. The Manichaeans were more consistent 
in both respects. 

The distinction between mind and matter, which has become 
a commonplace in philosophy and science and popular thought, 
has a religious origin, and began as the distinction of soul and body. 
The Orphic, as we saw, proclaims himself the child of earth and 
of the starry heaven ; from earth comes the body, from heaven the 
soul. It is this theory that Plato seeks to express in the language 
of philosophy. 

Socrates, in the Phaedo, proceeds at once to develop the ascetic 
implications of his doctrine, but his asceticism is of a moderate and 
gentlemanly sort. He does not say that the philosopher should 
wholly abstain from ordinary pleasures, but only that he should 
not be a slave to them. The philosopher should not care about 
eating and drinking, but of coune he should eat as much as is 
necessary; there is no suggestion of fasting. And we are told that 
Socrates, though indifferent to wine, could, on occasion, drink 
more than anybody else, without ever becoming intoxicated. 
It was not drinking that he condemned, but pleasure in drinking. 
In like manner, the philosopher must not care for the pleasures 
of love, or for costly raiment, or sandals, or other adornments 
of the person. He must be entirely concerned with the soul, 
and not with the body. "He would like, as far as he can, to get 
away from the body and to turn to the soul." 

It is obvious that this doctrine, popularized, would become 
ascetic, but in intention it is not, properly' speaking, ascetic. 
The philosopher will not abstain with an effort from the pleasures 



PLATO'S THEORY OF IMMORTALITY 

of sense, but will be thinking of other things. I have known many 
philosophers who forgot their meals, and read a book when at 
last they did eat. These men were acting as Plato says they should: 
they were not abstaining from gluttony by means of a moral 
effort, but were more interested in other matters. Apparently 
the philosopher should marry, and beget and rear children, in 
the same absent-minded way, but since the emancipation of 
women this has become more difficult. No wonder Xanthippe 
was a shrew. 

Philosophers, Socrates continues, try to dissever the soul from 
communion with thfe body, whereas other people think that life is 
not worth living for a man who has "no sense of pleasure and no 
part in bodily pleasure." In this phrase, Plato seems perhaps 
inadvertently to countenance the view of a certain class of 
moralists, that bodily pleasures are the only ones that count. 
These moralists hold that the man who does not seek the pleasures 
of sense must be eschewing pleasure altogether, and living virtu- 
ously. This is an error which has done untold harm. In so far as 
the division of mind and body can be accepted, the worst pleasures, 
as well as the best, are mental for example, envy, and many 
forms of cruelty and love of power. Milton's Satan rises superior 
to physical torment, and devotes himself to a work of destruction 
from which he derives a pleasure that is wholly of the mind. 
Many eminent ecclesiastics, having renounced the pleasures of 
sense, and not being on their guard against others, become 
dominated by love of power, which led them to appalling cruelties 
and persecutions, nominally for the sake of religion. In our own 
day, Hitler belongs to this type; by all accounts, the pleasures of 
sense are of very little importance to him. Liberation from the 
tyranny of the body contributes to greatness, but just as much to 
greatness in sin as to greatness in virtue. 

This, however, is a digression, from which we must return to 
Socrates. 

We come now to the intellectual aspect of the religion which 
Plato (rightly or wrongly) attributes to Socrates. We are told 
that the body is a hindrance in the acquisition of knowledge, and 
that sight and hearing are inaccurate witnesses: true existence, 
if revealed to the soul at all, is revealed in thought, not in sense. 
Ixrt us consider, for* a moment, the implications of this doctrine. 
It involves a complete rejection of empirical knowledge, including 

157 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

all history and geography. We cannot know that there was such 
a place as Athens, or such a man as Socrates; his death, and his 
courage in dying, belong to the world of appearance. It is only 
through sight and hearing that we know anything about all this, 
and the true philosopher ignores sight and hearing. What, then, 
is left to him? First, logic and mathematics; but these are hypo- 
thetical, and do not justify any categorical assertion about the real 
world. The next step and this is the crucial one depends upon 
the idea of the good. Having arrived at this idea, the philosopher 
is supposed to know that the good is the real, and thus to be able 
to infer that the world of ideas is the real world. Later philosophers 
had arguments to prove the identity of the real and the good, but 
Plato seems to have assumed it as self-evident. If we wish to 
understand him, we must, hypothetically, suppose this assumption 
justified. 

Thought is best, Socrates says, when the mind is gathered into 
itself, and is not troubled by sounds or sights or pain or pleasure 
but takes leave of the body and aspires after true being; "and in 
this the philosopher dishonours the body/' From this point, 
Socrates goes on to the ideas or forms or essences. There is 
absolute justice, absolute beauty, and absolute good, but they are 
not visible to the eye. "And I speak not of these alone, but of 
absolute greatness, and health, and strength, and of the essence 
or true nature of everything." All these are only to be seen by 
intellectual vision. Therefore while we are in the body, and while 
the soul is infected with the evils of the body, our desire for truth 
Mill not be satisfied. 

This point of view excludes scientific observation and experi- 
ment as methods for the attainment of knowledge. The experi- 
menter's mind is not "gathered into itself," and docs not aim at 
avoiding sounds or sights. The two kinds of mental activity that 
can be pursued by the method that Plato recommends are mathe- 
matics and mystic insight. This explains how these two come to 
be so intimately combined in Plato and the Pythagoreans. 

To the empiricist, the body is what brings us into touch with 
the world of external reality, bat to Plato it is doubly evil, as a 
distorting medium, causing us to see as through a glass darkly, 
and as a source of lusts which distract us from the pursuit of 
knowledge and the vision of truth. Some Quotations will mike 
this dear. 



PLATO'S THEORY OF IMMORTALITY 

The body is the source of endless trouble to us by reason of 
the mere requirement of food; and is liable also to diseases which 
overtake and impede us in the search after true being: it fills us 
full of loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and end- 
less foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes away from us all power 
of thinking at all. Whence come wars, and fightings and factions? 
Whence but from the body and the lusts of the body? Wars are 
occasioned by the love of money, and money has to be acquired 
for the sake and in the service of the body; and by reason of all 
these impediments we have no time to give to philosophy; and, 
last and worst of all, even if we are at leisure to betake ourselves 
to some speculation, the body is always breaking in upon us, 
causing turmoil and confusion in our inquiries, and so amazing us 
that we are prevented from seeing the truth. It has been proved 
to us by experience that if we would have true knowledge of 
anything we must be quit of the body the soul in herself must 
behold things in themselves: and then we shall attain the wisdom 
which we desire, and of which we say we are lovers; not while we 
live, but after death ; for if while in company with the body the 
soul cannot have pure knowledge, knowledge must be attained 
after death, if at all. 

And thus having got rid of the foolishness of the body we shall 
he pure and have converse with the pure, and know of ourselves 
the clear light everywhere, which is no other than the light of 
tnith. For the impure are not permitted to approach the pure. . . . 
And what is purification but the separation of the soul from the 
body ? . . . And this separation and release of the soul from the 
body is termed death. . . . And the true philosophers, and they 
only, arc ever seeking to release the soul. 

There is one true coin for which all things ought to be exchanged, 
and that is wisdom. 

The founders of the mysteries would appear to have had a real 
meaning, and were not talking nonsense when they intimated in 
a figure long ago that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated 
into the world below will lie on a slough, but that he who arrives 
there after initiation and purification will dwell with the gods. 
For many, as they say in the mysteries, are the thyrsus-bearers, but 
few are the mystics, meaning, as 1 interpret the words, the true 
philosophers. 

All this language is mystical, and is derived from the mysteries. 
"Purity" is an Orphic conception, having primarily a ritual 
meaning, but for Pilto it means freedom from slavery to the body 
and its needs. It it interesting to find him saying that wars are 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

caused by love of money, and that money is only needed for the 
service of the body. The first half of this opinion is the same as 
that held by Marx, but the second belongs to a very different out- 
look. Plato thinks that a man could live on very little money if his 
wants were reduced to a minimum, and this no doubt is true. But 
he also thinks that a philosopher should be exempt from manual 
labour; he must therefore live on wealth created by others. In a 
very poor State there are likely to be no philosophers. It was the 
imperialism of Athens in the age of Pericles that made it possible 
for Athenians to study philosophy. Speaking broadly, intellectual 
goods are just as expensive as more material commodities, and 
just as little independent of economic conditions. Science requires 
libraries, laboratories, telescopes, microscopes, and so on, and 
men of science have to be supported by the labour of others. But 
to the mystic all this is foolishness. A holy man in India or Tibet 
needs no apparatus, wears only a loin cloth, eats only rice, and is 
supported by very meagre charity because he is thought wise. 
This is the logical development of Plato's point of view. 

To return to the Phaedo: Cehcs expresses doubt as to the 
survival of the soul after death, and urges Socrates to offer argu- 
ments. This he proceeds to do, but it must be said that the argu- 
ments are very poor. 

Tlit first argument is that all things which have opposites arc 
generated from their opposites a statement which reminds us of 
Anaximander's views on cosmic justice. Now life and death are 
opposites, and therefore each must generate the other. It follows 
that the souk of the dead exist somewhere, and come back to 
earth in due course. St. Paul's statement, "the seed is not 
quickened except it die," seems to belong to some such theory as 
this. 

The second argument is that knowledge is recollection, and 
therefore the soul must have existed before birth. The theory that 
knowledge is recollection is supported chiefly by the fact that we 
have ideas, such as exact equality, which cannot be derived from 
experience. We have experience of approximate equality, but 
absolute equality is never found among sensible objects, and yet 
we know what we mean by "absolute equality." Since we have 
not learnt this from experience, we must have brought the know- 
ledge with us from a previous existence. A similar argument, he 
says, applies to all other ideas. Thus the existence of essences, 

160 



PLATO'S THEORY OF IMMORTALITY 

and our capacity to apprehend them, proves the pre-existence of 
the soul with knowledge. 

The contention that all knowledge is reminiscence is developed 
at greater length in the Meno (82 ff.). Here Socrates says "there is 
no teaching, but only recollection." He professes to prove his point 
by having Meno call in a slave-boy whom Socrates proceeds to 
question on geometrical problems. The boy's answers are supposed 
to show that he really knows geometry, although he has hitherto 
been unaware of possessing this knowledge. The same conclusion 
is drawn in the Meno as in the Phaedo, that knowledge is brought 
by the soul from a previous existence. 

As to this, one may observe, in the first place, that the argument 
is wholly inapplicable to empirical knowledge. The slave-boy 
could not have been led to "remember" when the Pyramids were 
built, or whether the siege of Troy really occurred, unless he had 
happened to be present at these events. Only the sort of knowledge 
that is called a priori especially logic and mathematics can be 
possibly supposed to exist in every one independently of experience. 
In fact, this is the only sort of knowledge (apart from mystic 
insight) that Plato admits to be really knowledge. Let us see how 
the argument can be met in regard to mathematics. 

Take the concept of equality. We must admit that we have no 
experience, among sensible objects, of exact equality ; we see only 
approximate equality. How, then, do we arrive at the idea of 
absolute equality? Or do we, perhaps, have no such idea? 

Let us take a concrete case. The metre is defined as the length 
of a certain rod in Paris at a certain temperature. What should we 
mean if we said, of some other rod, that its length was exactly 
one metre? I don't think \ve should mean anything. We could 
say: The most accurate processes of measurement known to 
science at the present day fail to show that our rod is either longer 
or shorter than the standard metre in Paris. We might, if we were 
sufficiently rash, add a prophecy that no subsequent refinements 
in the technique of measurement will alter this result. But this 
is still an empirical statement, in the sense that empirical evidence 
may at any moment disprove it. I do not think we really possess 
the idea of absolute equality that Plato supposes us to possess. 

But even if we do, it is clear that no child possesses it until it 
reaches a certain afce, and that the idea is elidttd by experience, 
although not directly derived from experience. Moreover, unless 

1 6l F 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

our existence before birth was not one of sense-perception, it 
would have been as incapable of generating the idea as this life 
is; and if our previous existence is supposed to have been partly 
super-sensible, why not make the same supposition concerning 
our present existence? On all these grounds, the argument fails. 

The doctrine of reminiscence being considered established, 
Cebes says: "About half of what was required has been proven; 
to wit, that our souls existed before we were born: that the 
soul will exist after death as well as before birth is the other half 
of which the proof is still wanting." Socrates accordingly applies 
himself to this. He says that it follows from what was said about 
everything being generated from its opposite, according to which 
death must generate life just as much as life generates death. But 
he adds another argument, which had a longer history in philo- 
sophy: that only what is complex can be dissolved, and that the 
soul, like the ideas, is simple and not compounded of parts. What 
is simple, it is thought, cannot begin or end or change. Now 
essences are unchanging: absolute beauty, for example, is always 
the same, whereas beautiful things continually change. Thus 
things seen are temporal, but things unseen are eternal. The body 
is seen, but the soul is unseen ; therefore the soul is to be classified 
in the group of things that are eternal. 

The soul, being eternal, is at home in the contemplation of 
eternal things, that is, essences, but is lost and confused when, 
as in sense-perception, it contemplates the world of changing 
things. 

The soul, when using the body as an instrument of perception, 
that is to say, when using the sense of sight or hearing or some 
other sense (for the meaning of perceiving through the body is 
perceiving through the senses) ... is then dragged by the body 
into the region of the changeable, and wanders and is confused ; 
the world spins round her, and she is like a drunkard, when she 
touches change. . . . But when returning into herself she reflects, 
then she passes into the other world, the region of purity, and 
eternity, and immortality, and unchangeableness, which arc her 
kindred, and with them she ever lives, when she is by herself, and 
is not let or hindered ; then she ceases from her erring ways, and 
being in communion with the unchanging is unchanging. And this 
state of the soul is called wisdom. 

The soul of the true philosopher, which has, in life, been 

162 



PLATO'S THEORY OP IMMORTALITY 

liberated from thraldom to the flesh, will, after death, depart to 
the invisible world, to live in bliss in the company of the gods. 
But the impure soul, which has loved the body, will become a 
ghost haunting the sepulchre, or will enter into the body of an 
animal, such as an ass or wolf or hawk, according to its character. 
A man who has been virtuous without being a philosopher will 
become a bee or wasp or ant, or some other animal of a gregarious 
and social sort. 

Only the true philosopher goes to heaven when he dies. "No 
one who has not studied philosophy and who is not entirely pure 
at the time of his departure is allowed to enter the company of 
the Gods, but the lover of knowledge only." That is why the true 
votaries of philosophy abstain from fleshly lusts: not that they 
fear poverty or disgrace, but because they "are conscious that the 
soul was simply fastened or glued to the body until philosophy 
received her, she could only view real existence through the bars 
of a prison, not in and through herself, . . . and by reason of lust 
had become the principal accomplice in her own captivity." The 
philosopher will be temperate because "each pleasure and pain 
is a sort of nail which nails and rivets the soul to the body, until 
si ie becomes like the body, and believes that to be true which the 
body affirms to be true." 

At this point, Simmias brings up the Pythagorean opinion that 
the soul is a harmony, and urges: if the lyre is broken, can the 
harmony survive? Socrates replies that the soul is not a harmony, 
for a harmony is complex, but the soul is simple. Moreover, he 
says, the view that the soul is a harmony is incompatible with its 
pre-existcnce, which was proved by the doctrine of reminiscence; 
for the harmony does not exist before the lyre. 

Socrates proceeds to give an account of his own philosophical 
development, which is very interesting, but not germane to the 
main argument. He goes on to expound the doctrine of ideas, 
leading to the conclusion "that ideas exist, and that other things 
participate in them and derive their names from them.*' At last 
lie describes the fate of souls after death: the good go to heaven, 
the bad to hell, the intermediate to purgatory. 

His end, and his farewells, are described. His last words are: 
"Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to pay the 
debt?" Men paid A cock to Asclepius when they recovered from 
tn illness, and Socrates has recovered from life's fitful fever. 

163 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

"Of aU the men of his time/* Phaedo concludes, "he was the 
wisest and justest and best." 

The Platonic Socrates was a pattern to subsequent philosophers 
for many ages. What are we to think of him ethically? (I am con- 
cerned only with the man as Plato portrays him.) His merits are 
obvious. He is indifferent to worldly success, so devoid of fear that 
he remains calm and urbane and humorous to the last moment, 
caring more for what he believes to be truth than for anything 
else whatever. He has, however, some very grave defects. He is 
dishonest and sophistical in argument, and in his private thinking 
he uses intellect to prove conclusions that are to him agreeable, 
rather than in a disinterested search for knowledge. There is 
something smug and unctuous about him, which reminds one of 
a bad type of cleric. His courage in the face of death would have 
been more remarkable if he had not believed that he was going 
to enjoy eternal bliss in the company of the gods. Unlike some of 
his predecessors, he was not scientific in his thinking, but was 
determined to prove the universe agreeable to his ethical standards. 
This is treachery to truth, and the worst of philosophic sin*. As 
a man, we may believe him admitted to the communion of saints; 
but as a philosopher he needs a long residence in ; scientific 
purgatory. 



Chapter XVII 
PLATO'S COSMOGONY 

PLATO'S cosmogony is set forth in the Timaeus, 1 which was 
translated into Latin by Cicero, and was, moreover, the 
only one of the dialogues that was known in the West in 
the Middle Ages. Both then, and earlier in Neoplatonism, it 
had more influence than anything else in Plato, which is curious, 
as it certainly contains more that is simply silly than is to be found 
in his other writings. As philosophy, it is unimportant, but his- 
torically it was so influential that it must be considered in some 
detail. 

The place occupied by Socrates in the earlier dialogues i* taken, 
in the Timaeus, by a Pythagorean, and the doctrines of that school 
are in the main adopted, including (up to a point) the view that 
number-is the explanation of the world. There is first a summary 
of the first five books of the Republic, then the myth of Atlantis, 
which is said to have been an island off the Pillars of Hercules, 
larger than Libya and Asia put together. Then Timaeus, who is a 
Pythagorean astronomer, proceeds to tell the history of the world 
down to the creation of man. What he says is, in outline, as follows. 
What is unchanging is apprehended by intelligence and reason ; 
what is changing is apprehended by opinion. The world, being 
sensible, cannot be eternal, and must have been created by God. 
Since God is good, He made the world after the pattern of the 
eternal; being without jealousy, He wanted everything as like 
Himself as possible. "God desired that all things should be good, 
and nothing bad, as far as possible." "Finding the whole visible 
sphere not at rest, but moving in an irregular and disorderly 
fashion, out of disorder he brought order." (Thus it appears that 
Plato's God, unlike the Jewish and Christian God, did not create 
the world out of nothing, but rearranged pre-existing material.) 
He put intelligence in the soul, and the soul in the body. He made 
the world as a whole a living creature having soul and intelligence. 
There is only one world, not many, as various pre-Socratics had 

1 This dialogue contains much that is obscure and has given rise to 
controversies among commentators. On the whole, I find myself in most 
agreement with Comford's admirable book, Plato's Cosmology. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

taught; there cannot be more than one, since it is a created copy 
designed to accord as closely as possible with the eternal original 
apprehended by God. The world in its entirety is one visible 
animal, comprehending within itself all other animals. It is a 
globe, because like is fairer than unlike, and only a globe is alike 
everywhere. It rotates, because circular motion is the most perfect ; 
and since this is its only motion it needs no feet or hands. 

The four elements, fire, air, water, and earth, each of which 
apparently is represented by a number, are in continued propor- 
tion, i.e. fire is to air as air is to water and as water is to earth. God 
used all the elements in making the world, and therefore it is 
perfect, and not liable to old age or disease. It is harmonized by 
proportion, which causes it to have the spirit of friendship, and 
therefore to be indissoluble except by God. 

God made first the soul, then the body. The soul is compounded 
of the indivisible-unchangeable and the divisible-changeable; it 
is a third and intermediate kind of essence. 

Here follows a Pythagorean account of the planets, leading to 
an explanation of the origin of time: 

When the father and creator saw the creature which he had 
made moving and living, the created image of the eternal gods, he 
rejoiced, and in his joy determined to make the copy still more like 
the original ; and as this was eternal, he sought to make the universe 
eternal, so far as might be. Now the nature of the ideal being was 
everlasting, but to bestow this attribute in its fulness upon a 
creature was impossible. Wherefore he resolved to have a moving 
image of eternity, and when be set in order the heaven, he made this 
image eternal but moving according to number, while eternity 
itself rests in unity; and this image we call Time. 1 

Before this, there were no days or nights. Of the eternal essence 
we must not say that it tvas or will be ; only is is correct. It is implied 
that of the "moving image of eternity* 1 it is correct to say that it 
was and will be. 

Time and the heavens came into existence at the same instant. 
God made the sun so that animals could learn arithmetic without 
the succession of days and nights, one supposes, we should not 
have thought of numbers. The sight of day and night, months 
and years, has created knowledge of number and given u* the 

1 Vaughcn mutt have been reading this pasngc when he wrote the 
poem beginning "I saw eternity the other night." 

166 



PLATO'S COSMOGONY 

conception of time, and hence came philosophy. This is the 
greatest boon we owe to sight. 

There are (apart from the world as a whole) four kinds of 
animals: gods, birds, fishes, and land animals. The gods are 
mainly fire; the fixed stars are divine and eternal animals. The 
Creator told the gods that he could destroy them, but would not 
do so. He left it to them to make the mortal part of all other 
animals, after he had made the immortal and divine part. (This, 
like other passages about the gods in Plato, is perhaps not to be 
taken very seriously. At the beginning, Timaeus says he seeks 
only probability, and cannot be sure. Many details are obviously 
imaginative, and not meant literally.) 

The Creator, Timaeus says, made one soul for each star. Souls 
have sensation, love, fear, and anger; if they overcome these, they 
live righteously, but if not, not. If a man lives well, he goes, after 
death, to live happily for ever in his star. But if he lives badly, he 
will, in the next life, be a woman ; if he (or she) persists in evil- 
doing, he (or she) will become a brute, and go on through trans- 
migrations until at last reason conquers. God put some souls on 
earth, some on the moon, some on other planets and stars, and 
left it to the gods to fashion their bodies. 

There are two kinds of causes, those that are intelligent, and 
those that, being moved by others, are, in turn, compelled to 
move others. The former are endowed with mind, and are the 
workers of things fair and good, while the latter produce chance 
effects without order or design. Both sorts ought to be studied, 
for the creation is mixed, being made up of necessity and mind. 
(It will be observed that necessity is not subject to God's power.) 
Timaeus now proceeds to deal with the part contributed by 
necessity. 1 

Earth, air, tire, and water are not the first principles or letters 
or elements; they are not even syllables or first compounds. Fire, 
for instance, should not be called this, but such that is to say, it 
is not a substance, but rather a state of substance. At this point, 
the question is raised: are intelligible essences only names? The 
answer turns, we are told, on whether mind is or is not the same 

1 Cornford (op. cit.) points out that "necessity" is not to be con- 
founded with the modern conception of a deterministic reign of law. The 
things that happen through "necessity" are those not brought about by 
a purpose : they are chaotic and not subject to laws. 

167 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

thing as true opinion. If it is not, knowledge must be knowledge 
of essences, and therefore essences cannot be mere names. Now 
mind and true opinion certainly differ, for the one is implanted 
by instruction, the other by persuasion; one is accompanied by 
true reason, the other is not; all men share in true opinion, 
but mind is the attribute of the gods and of a very few among 
men. 

This leads to a somewhat curious theory of space, as something 
intermediate between the world of essence and the world of 
transient sensible things. 

There is one kind of being which is always the same, uncreated 
and indestructible, never receiving anything into itself from with- 
out, nor itself going out to any other, but invisible and imper- 
ceptible by any sense, and of which the contemplation is granted 
to intelligence only. And there is another nature of the same name 
with it, and like to it, perceived by sense, created, always in motion, 
becoming in place and again vanishing out of place, which is appre- 
hended by opinion and sense. And there is a third nature, which 
is space, and is eternal, and admits not of destruction and provides 
a home for all created things, and is apprehended without the help 
of sense, by a kind of spurious reason, and is hardly real ; which \vc 
beholding as in a dream, say of all existence that it must of necessity 
be in some place and occupy a space, but that what is neither in 
heaven nor on earth has no existence. 

This is a very difficult passage, which I do not pretend to under- 
stand at all fully. The theory expressed must, I think, have arisen 
from reflection on geometry, which appeared to be a matter of 
pure reason, like arithmetic, and yet had to do with space, which 
was an aspect of the sensible world. In general it is fanciful to 
find analogies with later philosophers, but I cannot help thinking 
that Kant must have liked this view of space, as one having an 
affinity with his own. 

The true elements of the material world, Timaeus says, are not 
earth, air, fire, and water, but two sorts of right-angled triangles, 
the one which is half a square and the one which is half an equi- 
lateral triangle. Originally everything was in confusion, and "the 
various elements had different places before they were arranged 
so as to form the universe/' But then God fashioned them by 
form and number, and "made them as far as'possible the fairest 
and best, out of things which were not fair and good." The above 

168 



PLATO'S COSMOGONY 

two sorts of triangles, we are told, are the most beautiful forms 
and therefore God used them in constructing matter. By means of 
these two triangles, it is possible to construct four of the five 
regular solids, and each atom of one of the four elements is a 
regular solid. Atoms of earth are cubes; of fire, tetrahedra; of air, 
octahedra ; and of water, icosahedra. (I shall come to the dode- 
cahedron presently.) 

The theory of the regular solids, which is set forth in the 
thirteenth book of Euclid, was, in Plato's day, a recent discovery; 
it was completed by Theaetetus, who appears as a very young 
man in the dialogue that bears his name. It was, according to 
tradition, he who first proved that there are only five kinds of 
regular solids, and discovered the octahedron and the icosahedron. 1 
The regular tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron, have 
equilateral triangles for their faces; the dodecahedron has regular 
pentagons, and cannot therefore be constructed out of Plato's two 
triangles. For this reason he does not use it in connection with the 
four elements. 

As for the dodecahedron, Plato says only "there was yet a fifth 
combination which God used in the delineation of the universe." 
This is obscure, and suggests that the universe is a dodecahedron; 
but elsewhere it is said to be a sphere. 1 The pentagram has always 
been prominent in magic, and apparently owes this position to the 
Pythagoreans, who called it '"Health" and used it as a symbol of 
recognition of members of the brotherhood. 8 It seems that it owed 
its properties to the fact that the dodecahedron has pentagons for 
its faces, and is, in some sense, a symbol of the universe. This 
topic is attractive, but it is difficult to ascertain much that is 
definite about it. 

After a discussion of sensation, Timaeus proceeds to explain 
the two souls in man, one immortal, the other mortal, one created 
by God, the other by the gods. The mortal soul is "subject to 
terrible and irresistible affections first of all, pleasure, the 
greatest incitement to evil; then pain, which deters from good; 
also rashness and fear, two foolish counsellors, anger hard to be 
appeased, and hope easily led astray; these they (the gods) mingled 

1 Sec Heath, Greek Mathcmalic*, Vol. 1, pp. 159, 162, 294-296. 
1 For a reconciliation of the two statements, see Cornford, op. /., 
p. 219. 
9 Heath, of. ri/., p. 161. 

169 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

with irrational sense and with all-daring love according to 
necessary laws, and so framed men." 

The immortal soul is in the head, the mortal in the breast. 

There is some curious physiology, as, that the purpose of the 
intestines is to prevent gluttony by keeping the food in, and then 
there is another account of transmigration. Cowardly or un- 
righteous men will, in the next life, be women. Innocent light- 
minded men, who think that astronomy can be learnt by looking 
at the stars without knowledge of mathematics, will become birds ; 
those who have no philosophy will become wild land-animals; 
the very stupidest will become fishes. 

The last paragraph of the dialogue sums it up : 

We may now say that our discourse about the nature of the 
universe has an end. The world has received animals, mortal and 
immortal, and is fulfilled with them, and has become a visible 
animal containing the visible the sensible God who is the image 
of the intellectual, the greatest, best, fairest, most perfect- the 
one only-begotten heaven. 

It is difficult to know what to take seriously in the Tiwacus, 
and what to regard as play of fancy. I think the account of the 
creation as bringing order out of chaos is to be taken quite 
seriously; so also is the proportion between the four elements, and 
their relation to the regular solids and their constituent triangles. 
The accounts of time and space are obviously what Plato believes, 
and so is the view of the created world as a copy of an eternal 
archetype. The mixture of necessity and purpose in the world is 
a belief common to practically all Greeks, long antedating the rise 
of philosophy; Plato accepted it, and thus avoided the problem 
of evil, which troubles Christian theology. I think his world- 
animal is seriously meant. But the details about transmigration, 
and the pan attributed to the gods, and other inessentials, are, I 
think, only put in to give a possible concreteness. 

The whole dialogue, as I said before, deserves to he studied 
because of its great influence on ancient and medieval thought; 
and this influence is not confined to what is least fantastic. 



170 



Chapter XVIII 
KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

MOST modern men take it for granted that empirical know- 
ledge is dependent upon, or derived from, perception. 
There is however in Plato and among philosophers of 
certain other schools a very different doctrine, to the effect that 
there is nothing worthy to be called "knowledge" to be derived 
from the senses, and that the only real knowledge has to do with 
concepts. In this view, "2 + 2 = 4" is genuine knowledge, but 
such a statement as "snow is white" is so full of ambiguity and 
uncertainty that it cannot find a place in the philosopher's corpus 
of truths. 

This view is perhaps traceable to Panne nides, but in its explicit 
form the philosophic world owes it to Plato. I propose, in this 
chapter, to deal with Plato's criticism of the view that know- 
ledge is the same thing as perception, which occupies the first 
half of the Theaetetus. 

This dialogue is concerned to find a definition of "knowledge," 
but ends without arriving at any but a negative conclusion; 
several definitions are proposed and rejected, but no definition 
that is considered satisfactory is suggested. 

The first of the suggested definitions, and the only one that I 
shall consider, is set forth by Theaetetus in the words: 

"It seems to me that one who knows something is perceiving 
the thing that he knows, and, so far as I can see at present, 
knowledge is nothing but perception." 

Socrates identifies this doctrine with that of Protagoras, that 
"man is the measure of all thini;s v " i.e.*that any given thing "is 
to me such as it appears to me, and is to you such as it appears 
10 you." Socrates adds: "Perception, then, is always something 
that w, and, as being knowledge, it is infallible." 

A large part of the argument that follows is concerned with the 
characterization of perception; when once this is completed, it 
does not take long to prove that such a thing as perception has 
turned out to be cannot be knowledge. 

Socrates adds to* the doctrine of Protagoras the doctrine of 
Heraclitus, jhat everything is always changing, i.e. that "all the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

things we are pleased to say 'are' really are in process of becoming. " 
Plato believes this to be true of objects of sense, but not of the 
objects of real knowledge. Throughout the dialogue, however, 
his positive doctrines remain in the background. 

From the doctrine of Heraclitus, even if it be only applicable 
to objects of sense, together with the definition of knowledge as 
perception, it follows that knowledge is of what becomes, not of 
what is. 

There are, at this point, some puzzles of a very elementary 
character. We are told that, since 6 is greater than 4 but less than 
12, 6 is both great and small, which is a contradiction. Again, 
Socrates is now taller than Theaetetus, who is a youth not yet 
full grown; but in a few years Socrates will be shorter than 
Theaetetus. Therefore Socrates is both tall and short. The idea 
of a relational proposition seems to have puzzled Plato, as it did 
most of the great philosophers down to Hegel (inclusive). These 
puzzles, however, are not very germane to the argument, and 
may be ignored. 

Returning to perception, it is regarded as due to an interaction 
between the object and the sense-organ, both of which, according 
to the doctrine of Heraclitus, are always changing, and both of 
which, in changing, change the percept. Socrates remarks that 
when he is well he finds wine sweet, but when ill, sour. Here it 
is a change in the percipient that causes the change in the percept. 

Certain objections to the doctrine of Protagoras arc advanced, 
and some of these are subsequently withdrawn. It is urged that 
Protagoras ought equally to have admitted pigs and baboons as 
measures of all things, since they also are percipients. Questions 
are raised as to the validity of perception in dreams and in madness. 
It is suggested that, if Protagoras is right, one man knows no 
more than another: not only is Protagoras as wise as the gods, 
but, what is more serious, he is no wiser than a fool. Further, if 
one man's judgments are as correct as another's, the people who 
judge that Protagoras is mistaken have the same reason to be 
thought right as he has. 

Socrates undertakes to find an answer to many of these objec- 
tions, putting himself, for the moment, in the place of Protagoras. 
As for dreams, the percepu are true as percept*. As for the argu- 
ment about pigs and baboons, this is dismissed as vulgar abuse. 
As for the argument that, if each man U the measure pf all things, 

172 



KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

one man is as wise as another, Socrates suggests, on behalf of 
Protagoras, a very interesting answer, namely that, while one 
judgment cannot be truer than another, it can be better, in the 
sense of having better consequences. This suggests pragmatism. 1 

This answer, however, though Socrates has invented it, does 
not satisfy him. He urges, for example, that when a doctor fore- 
tells the course of my illness, he actually knows more of my future 
than I do. And when men differ as to what it is wise for the State 
to decree, the issue shows that some men had a greater knowledge 
as to the future than others had. Thus we cannot escape the 
conclusion that a wise man is a better measure of things than a fool. 

All these are objections to the doctrine that each man is the 
measure of all things, and only indirectly to the doctrine that 
"knowledge" means "perception," in so far as this doctrine leads 
to the other. There is, however, a direct argument, namely that 
memory must be allowed as well as perception. This is admitted, 
and to this extent the proposed definition is amended. 

We come next to criticisms of the doctrine of Heraclitus. This 
is first pushed to extremes, in accordance, we are told, with the 
practice of his disciples among the bright youths of Ephesus. A 
thing may change in two ways, by locomotion, and by a change of 
quality, and the doctrine of flux is held to state that everything 
is always changing in both respects. 2 And not only is everything 
always undergoing some qualitative change, but everything is 
always changing all its qualities so, we are told, clever people 
think at Ephesus. This has awkward consequences. We cannot 
say "this is white," for if it was white when we began speaking it 
will have ceased to be white before we end our sentence. We 
cannot be right in saying we are seeing a thing, for seeing is 
perpetually changing into not-seeing.* If everything is changing 

1 It was presumably thit passage that first suggested to F. C. S. Schiller 
his admiration of Protagoras. 

1 It seems that neither Plato nor the dynamic youths of Ephesus had 
noticed that locomotion is impossible on the extreme Heraclitean doctrine. 
Motion demands that a given thing A should be now here, now there : it 
must remain the tame thing while it moves. In the doctrine that Plato 
examines there is change of quality and change of place, but not change 
of substance. In this respect, modern quantum physics goes further than 
the most extreme di^iples of Heraclitus went in Plato's time. Plato \\ould 
have thought this fatal to science, but it has not proved so. 

* Compaq* the advertisement: "That's Shell, that was. 9 

173 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

in every kind of way, seeing has no right to be called seeing rather 
than not-seeing, or perception to be called perception rather than 
not-perception. And when we say "perception is knowledge," we 
might just as well say "perception is not-knowledge." 

What the above argument amounts to is that, whatever else 
may be in perpetual flux, the meanings of words must be fixed, 
at least for a time, since otherwise no assertion is definite, and no 
assertion is true rather than false. There must be something more 
or less constant, if discourse and knowledge are to be possible. 
This, I think, should be admitted. But a great deal of flux is 
compatible with this admission. 

There is, at this point, a refusal to discuss Parmenides, on the 
ground that he is too great and grand. He is a "reverend and 
awfiil figure." "There was a sort of depth in him that was alto- 
gether noble." He is "one being whom I respect above all." In 
these remarks Plato shows his love for a static universe, and his 
dislike of the Heraclitean flux which he has been admitting for 
the sake of argument. But after this expression of reverence he 
abstains from developing the Parmenidean alternative to I leraclitus. 
We now reach Plato's final argument against the identification 
of knowledge with perception. He begins by pointing out that we 
perceive through eyes and ears, rather than with them, and he goes 
on to point out that some of our knowledge is not connected with 
any sense-organ. We can know, for instance, that sounds and 
colours are unlike, though no organ of sense can perceive both. 
There is no special organ for "existence and non-existence, like- 
ness and unlikeness, sameness and differences, and also unity and 
numbers in general." The same applies to honourable and dis- 
honourable, and good and bad. "The mind contemplates some 
things through its own instrumentality, others through the bodily 
faculties." We perceive hard and soft through touch, but it is the 
mind that judges that they exist and that they are contraries. Only 
the mind can reach existence, and we cannot reach truth if we do 
not reach existence. It follows that we cannot know things through 
the senses alone, since through the senses alone we cannot know 
that things exist. Therefore knowledge consists in reflection, not 
in impressions, and perception is not knowledge, because it "has 
no part in apprehending truth, since it has none in apprehending 
existence." 

7*o disentangle what can be accepted from what must be rejected 

*74 



KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

in this argument against the identification of knowledge with 
perception is by no means easy. There are three inter-connected 
theses that Plato discusses, namely: 

(1) Knowledge is perception; 

(2) Man is the measure of all things; 

(3) Everything is in a state of flux. 

(i) The first of these, with which alone the argument is pri- 
marily concerned, is hardly discussed on its own account except 
in the final passage with which we have just been concerned. 
Here it is argued that comparison, knowledge of existence, and 
understanding of number, are essential to knowledge, but cannot 
be included in perception since they are not effected through 
any sense-organ. The things to be said about these are different. 
Let us begin with likeness and unlikeness. 

That two shades of colour, both of which I am seeing, are 
similar or dissimilar as the case may be, is something which I, 
for my part, should accept, not indeed as a "percept," but as a 
"judgment of perception. 11 A percept, I should say, is not know- 
ledge, but merely something that happens, and that belongs 
equally to the world of physics and to the world of psychology. 
We naturally think of perception, as Plato does, as a relation 
between a percipient and an object: we say "I see a table." But 
here "I" and "table" are logical constructions. The core of crude 
occurrence is merely certain patches of colour. These are asso- 
ciated with images of touch, they may cause words, and they may 
become a source of memories. The percept as filled out with 
images of touch becomes an "object," which is supposed physical; 
the percept as filled out with words and memories becomes a 
"perception," which is part of a "subject" and is considered 
mental. The percept is just an occurrence, and neither true nor 
false; the percept as filled out with words is a judgment, and 
capable of truth or falsehood. This judgment I call a "judgment 
of perception." The proposition "knowledge is perception" must 
be interpreted as meaning "knowledge is judgments of perception." 
It is only in this form that it is grammatically capable of being 
correct. 

To return to likeness and unlikeness, it is quite possible, when 
I perceive two colours simultaneously, for their likeness or unlike- 
ness to be part of the datum, and to be asserted in a judgment of 

175 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

perception. Plato's argument that we have no sense-organ for 
perceiving likeness and unlikeness ignores the cortex, and assumes 
that all sense-organs must be at the surface of the body. 

The argument for including likeness and unlikeness as possible 
perceptive data is as follows. Let us assume that we see two shades 
of colour A and B, and that we judge "A is like B." Let us assume 
further, as Plato does, that such a judgment is in general correct, 
and, in particular, is correct in the case we are considering. There 
is, then, a relation of likeness between A and B, and not merely 
a judgment on our part asserting likeness. If there were only our 
judgment, it would be an arbitrary judgment, incapable of truth 
or falsehood. Since it obviously is capable of truth or falsehood, 
the likeness can subsist between A and B, and cannot be merely 
something "mental." The judgment "A is like B" is true (if it is 
true) in virtue of a "fact," just as much as the judgment "A is 
red" or "A is round." The mind is no wore involved in the per- 
ception of likeness than in the perception of colour. 

I come now to existence^ on which Plato lays great stress. We 
have, he says, as regards sound and colour, a thought which 
includes both at once, namely that they exist. Existence belongs 
to everything, and is among the things that the mind apprehends 
by itself; without reaching existence, it is impossible to reach 
truth. 

The argument against Plato here is quite different from that 
in the case of likeness and unlikeness. The argument here is that 
all that Plato says about existence is bad grammar, or rather bad 
syntax. This point is important, not only in connection with 
Plato, but also with other matters such as the ontological argument 
for the existence of the Deity. 

Suppose you say to a child "lions exist, but unicorns don't," 
you can prove your point so far as lions are concerned by taking 
him to the Zoo and saying "look, that's a lion." You will not, 
unless you are a philosopher, add: "And you can sec that that 
exists." If, being a philosopher, you do add this, you are uttering 
nonsense. To say "lions exist" means "there are lions," i.e. " 'x 
is a lion' is true for a suitable #." But we cannot say of the suitable 
x that it "exists"; we can only apply this verb to a description, 
complete or incomplete. "Lion" is an incomplete description, 
because it applies to many objects: "The largbst lion in the Zoo" 
is complete, because it applies to only one object. 

176 



KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

Now suppose that I am looking at a bright red patch. I may 
say "this is my present percept"; I may also say "my present 
percept exists"; but I must not say "this exists/' because the 
word "exists" is only significant when applied to a description 
as opposed to a name. 1 This disposes of existence as one of the 
things that the mind is aware of in objects. 

I come now to understanding of numbers. Here there are two 
very different things to be considered : on the one hand, the pro- 
positions of arithmetic, and on the other hand, empirical pro- 
positions of enumeration. "2 + 2 = 4" is of the former kind; "I 
have ten fingers" is of the latter. 

I should agree with Plato that arithmetic, and pure mathematics 
generally, is not derived from perception. Pure mathematics con- 
sists of tautologies, analogous to "men are men," but usually 
more complicated. To know that a mathematical proposition is 
correct, we do not have to study the world, but only the meanings 
of the symbols ; and the symbols, when we dispense with definitions 
(of which the purpose is merely abbreviation), are found to be 
such words as "or" and "not," and "all" and "some," which do 
not, like "Socrates," denote anything in the actual world. A 
mathematical equation asserts that two groups of symbols have 
the same meaning; and so long as we confine ourselves to pure 
mathematics, this meaning must be one that can be understood 
without knowing anything about what can be perceived. Mathe- 
matical truth, therefore, is, as Plato contends, independent of 
perception ; but it is truth of a very peculiar sort, and is concerned 
only with symbols. 

Propositions of enumeration, such as "I have ten fingers," are 
in quite a different category, and are obviously, at least in part, 
dependent on perception. Clearly the concept "finger" is abstracted 
from perception; but how about the concept "ten"? Here we 
may seem to have arrived at a true universal or Platonic idea. We 
cannot say that "ten" is abstracted from perception, for any 
percept which can be viewed as ten of some kind of thing can 
equally well be viewed otherwise. Suppose I give the name 
"digitary" to all the fingers of one hand taken together; then I 
can say "I have two digitaries," and this describes the same fact 
of perception as I formerly described by the help of the number 
ten. Thus in the statement "I have ten fingers" perception plays 
1 On this subject see the last chapter of the present work. 

177 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

a smaller part, and conception a larger part, than in such a 
statement as "this is red." The matter, however, is only one of 
degree. 

The complete answer, as regards propositions in which the 
word "ten" occurs, is that, when these propositions are correctly 
analysed, they are found to contain no constituent corresponding 
to the word "ten." To explain this in the case of such a large 
number as ten would be complicated ; let us, therefore, substitute 
"I have two hands." This means: 

"There is an a such that there is a b such that a and b are not 
identical and whatever x may be, l x is a hand of mine* is true 
when, and only when, x is a or x is 6." 

Here the word "two" does not occur. It is true that two letters 
a and b occur, but we do not need to know that they are two, any 
more than we need to know that they are black, or white, or 
whatever colour they may happen to be. 

Thus numbers are, in a certain precise sense, formal. The facts 
which verify various propositions asserting that various collections 
each have two members, have in common, not a constituent, but 
a form. In this they differ from propositions about the Statue of 
Liberty, or the moon, or George Washington. Such propositions 
refer to a particular portion of space-time; it is this that is in 
common between all the statements that can be made about the 
Statue of Liberty. But there is nothing in common among pro- 
positions "there are two so-and-so's" except a common form. 
The relation of the symbol "two" to the meaning of a proposition 
in which it occurs is far more complicated than the relation of the 
symbol "red" to the meaning of a proposition in which it occurs. 
We may say, in a certain sense, that the symbol "two" means 
nothing, for, when it occurs in a true statement, there is no 
corresponding constituent in the meaning of the statement. We 
may continue, if we like, to say that numbers are eternal, im- 
mutable, and so on, but we must add that they are logical fictions. 

There is a further point. Concerning sound and colour, Plato 
says "both together are two, and each of them is erne." We have 
considered the two\ now we must consider the one. There is here 
a mistake very analogous to that concerning existence. The pre- 
dicate "one" is not applicable to things, but only to unit classes. 
We can say "the earth has one satellite," bdt it is a syntactical 
error to say "the moon is one." For what can such an assertion 



KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

mean ? You may just as well say "the moon is many/' since it 
has many parts. To say "the earth has one satellite*' is to give a 
property of the concept "earth's satellite," namely the following 
property: 

"There is a c such that '* is a satellite of the earth' is true when, 
and only when, x is ." 

This is an astronomical truth; but if, for "a satellite of the 
earth/' you substitute "the moon" or any other proper name, the 
result is either meaningless or a mere tautology. "One," therefore, 
is a property of certain concepts, just as "ten" is a property of the 
concept "my finger." But to argue "the earth has one satellite, 
namely the moon, therefore the moon is one" is as bad as to 
argue "The Apostles were twelve; Peter was an apostle; therefore 
Peter was twelve/ 1 which would be valid if for "twelve" we 
substituted "white." 

The above considerations have shown that, while there is a 
formal kind of knowledge, namely logic and mathematics, which 
is not derived from perception, Plato's arguments as regards all 
other knowledge are fallacious. This does not, of course, prove 
that his conclusion is false; it proves only that he has given no 
valid reason for supposing it true. 

(2) I come now to the position of Protagoras, that man is the 
measure of all things, or, as it is interpreted, that each man is the 
measure of all things. Mere it is essential to decide the level upon 
which the discussion is to proceed. It is obvious that, to begin 
with, we must distinguish between percepts and inferences. Among 
percepts, each man is inevitably confined to his own; what he 
knows of the percepts of others he knows by inference from his 
own percepts in hearing and reading. The percepts of dreamers 
and madmen, as percepts, arc just as good as those of others; the 
only objection to them is that, as their context is unusual, they 
are apt to give rise to fallacious inferences. 

But how about inferences? Are they equally personal and 
private? In a sense, we must admit that they are. What I am to 
believe, 1 must believe because of some reason that appeals to 
me. It is true that my reason may be some one else's assertion, 
but that may be a perfectly adequate reason for instance, if I am 
a judge listening to evidence. And however Protagorean I may 
be, it is reasonable to accept the opinion of an accountant about 
a set of figures in preference to my own, for 1 may have repeatedly 

'79 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

found that if, at first, I disagree with him, a little more care shows 
me that he was right. In this sense I may admit that another man 
is wiser than I am. The Protagorean position, rightly interpreted, 
does not involve the view that I never make mistakes, but only 
that the evidence of my mistakes must appear to me. My past self 
can be judged just as another person can be judged. But all this 
presupposes that, as regards inferences as opposed to percepts, 
there is some impersonal standard of correctness. If any inference 
that I happen to draw is just as good as any other, then the in- 
tellectual anarchy that Plato deduces from Protagoras does in 
fact follow. On this point, therefore, which is an important one, 
Plato seems to be in the right. But the empiricist would say that 
perceptions are the test of correctness in inference in empirical 
material. 

(3) The doctrine of universal flux is caricatured by Plato, and 
it is difficult to suppose that any one ever held it in the extreme 
form that he gives to it. Let us suppose, for example, that the 
colours we see are continually changing. Such a word as "red" 
applies to many shades of colour, and if we say "I see red," there 
is no reason why this should not remain true throughout the time 
that it takes to say it. Plato gets his results by applying to pro- 
cesses of continuous change such logical oppositions as perceiving 
and not-perceiving, knowing and not-knowing. Such oppositions, 
however, are not suitable for describing such processes. Suppose, 
on a foggy day, you watch a man walking away from you along a 
road: he grows dimmer and dimmer, and there comes a moment 
when you are sure that you no longer see him, but there is an 
intermediate period of doubt. Logical oppositions have been 
invented for our convenience, but continuous change requires a 
quantitative apparatus, the possibility of which Plato ignores. 
What he says on this subject, therefore, is largely beside the mark. 

At the same time, it must be admitted that, unless words, to 
some extent, had fixed meanings, discourse would be impossible. 
Here again, however, it is easy to be too absolute. Words do change 
their meanings; take, for example, the word "idea," It i* only 
by a considerable process of education that we learn to give to 
this word something like the meaning which Plato gave to it. It 
is necessary that the changes in the meanings of words should he 
slower than the changes that the words d&cribe; but it is not 
necessary that there should be no changes in the meanings of 

180 



KNOWLEDGE AND PERCEPTION IN PLATO 

words. Perhaps this does not apply to the abstract words of logic 
and mathematics, but these words, as we have seen, apply only 
to the form, not to the matter, of propositions. Here, again, we 
find that logic and mathematics are peculiar. Plato, under the 
influence of the Pythagoreans, assimilated other knowledge too 
much to mathematics. He shared this mistake with many of the 
greatest philosophers, but it was a mistake none the less. 



181 



Chapter XIX 
ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

IN reading any important philosopher, but most of all in reading 
Aristotle, it is necessary to study him in two ways: with refer- 
ence to his predecessors, and with reference to his successors. 
In the former aspect, Aristotle's merits are enormous ; in the latter, 
his demerits are equally enormous. For his demerits, however, his 
successors are more responsible than he is. He came at the end of 
the creative period in Greek thought, and after his death it was 
two thousand years before the world produced any philosopher 
who could be regarded as approximately his equal. Towards the 
end of this long period his authority had become almost as un- 
questioned as that of the Church, and in science, as well as in 
philosophy, had become a serious obstacle to progress. Ever since 
the beginning of the seventeenth century, almost every serious 
intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some 
Aristotelian doctrine; in logic, this is still true at the present day. 
But it would have been at least as disastrous if any of his pre- 
decessors (except perhaps Democritus) had acquired equal 
authority. To do him justice, we must, to bejrin with, forget his 
excessive posthumous fame, and the equally excessive posthumous 
condemnation to which it led. 

Aristotle was born, probably in 384 B.C., at Stagira in Thrace. 
His father had inherited the position of family physician to the 
king of Macedonia. At about the age of eighteen Aristotle came 
to Athens and became a pupil of Plato ; he remained in the Aca- 
demy for nearly twenty years, until the death of Plato in 348-7 B.C. 
I le then travelled for a time, and married either the sister or the 
niece of a tyrant named Hermias. (Scandal said she was the 
daughter or concubine of Hermias, but both stories are disproved 
by the fact that he was a eunuch.) In 343 B.C. he became tutor to 
Alexander, then thirteen years old, and continued in that position 
until, at the age of sixteen, Alexander was pronounced by his 
father to be of age, and was appointed regent during Philip's 
absence. Everything one would wish to know of the relations of 
Aristotle and Alexander is unascertainable, the more so as legends 
were soon invented on the subject. There are letters between them 

182 



ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

which are generally regarded as forgeries. People who admire 
both men suppose that the tutor influenced the pupil. Hegel 
thinks that Alexander's career shows the practical usefulness of 
philosophy. As to this, A. W. Benn says: "It would be unfortunate 
if philosophy had no better testimonial to show for herself than 
the character of Alexander. . . . Arrogant, drunken, cruel, 
vindictive, and grossly superstitious, he united the vices of a 
Highland chieftain to the frenzy of an Oriental despot." 1 

For my part, while I agree with Benn about the character of 
Alexander, I nevertheless think that his work was enormously 
important and enormously beneficial, since, but for him, the whole 
tradition of Hellenic civilization might well have perished. As 
to Aristotle's influence on him, we are left free to conjecture 
whatever seems to us most plausible. For my part, I should 
suppose it nil. Alexander was an ambitious and passionate boy, 
on bad terms with his father, and presumably impatient of 
schooling. Aristotle thought no State should have as many as one 
hundred thousand citizens, 2 and preached the doctrine of the 
golden mean. I cannot imagine his pupil regarding him as any- 
thing but a prosy old pedant, set over him by his father to keep 
him out of mischief. Alexander, it is true, had a certain snobbish 
respect for Athenian civilization, but this was common to his 
whole dynasty, who wished to prove that they were not barbarians. 
It was analogous to the feeline; of nineteenth-century Russian 
aristocrats for Paris. This, therefore, was not attributable to 
Aristotle's influence. And I do not see anything else in Alexander 
that could possibly have come from this source. 

It is more surprising that Alexander had so little influence on 
Aristotle, whose speculations on politics were blandly oblivious 
of the fact that the era of City States had given \vay to the era of 
empires. I suspect that Aristotle, to the end, thought of him as 
"that idle and headstrong' boy, who never could understand any- 
thing of philosophy/* On the whole, the contacts of these two 
great men seem to have been as unfruitful as if they had lived in 
different worlds. 

From 335 B.C. to 323 B.C. (in which latter year Alexander died), 
Aristotle lived at Athens. It was during these twelve years that he 
founded his school and wrote most of his books. At the death of 
Alexander, the Athenians rebelled, and turned on his friends, 

1 Tht Cree^ Philosophers, Vol. I, p. 285. * Ethics, 11708. 

183 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

including Aristotle, who was indicted for impiety, but, unlike 
Socrates, fled to avoid punishment. In the next year (322) he died. 

Aristotle, as a philosopher, is in many ways very different from 
all his predecessors. He is the first to write like a professor: his 
treatises are systematic, his discussions are divided into heads, 
he is a professional teacher, not an inspired prophet. His work is 
critical, careful, pedestrian, without any trace of Bacchic en- 
thusiasm. The Orphic elements in Plato are watered down in 
Aristotle, and mixed with a strong dose of common sense; where 
he is Platonic, one feels that his natural temperament has been 
overpowered by the teaching to which he has been subjected. He 
is not passionate, or in any profound sense religious. The errors 
of his predecessors were the glorious errors of youth attempting 
the impossible ; his errors are those of age which cannot free itself 
of habitual prejudices. He is best in detail and in criticism; he 
fails in large construction, for lack of fundamental clarity and 
Titanic fire. 

It is difficult to decide at what point to begin an account of 
Aristotle's metaphysics, but perhaps the best place is his criticism 
of the theory of ideas and his own alternative doctrine of uni- 
versals. He advances against the theory of ideas a number of very 
good arguments, most of which are already to be found in Plato's 
Parmenides. The strongest argument is that of the "third man": 
if a man is a man because he resembles the ideal man, there must 
be a still more ideal man to whom both ordinary men and the 
ideal man are similar. Again, Socrates is both a man and an animal, 
and the question arises whether the ideal man is an ideal animal ; 
if he is, there must be as many ideal animals as there are species 
of animals. It is needless to pursue the matter; Aristotle makes it 
obvious that, when a number of individuals share a predicate, 
this cannot be because of relation to something of the same kind 
as themselves, but more ideal. This much may be taken as proved, 
but Aristotle's own doctrine is far from clear. It was this lack of 
clarity that made possible the medieval controversy between 
nominalists and realists. 

Aristotle's metaphysics, roughly speaking, may be described as 
Plato diluted by common sense, lie is difficult because Plato and 
common sense do not mix easily. When one tries to understand 
him, one thinks part of the time that he is expressing the ordinary 
views of a person innocent of philosophy and the rest of the time 

184 



ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

that he is setting forth Platonism with a new vocabulary. It does 
not do to lay too much stress on any single passage, because there 
is liable to be a correction or modification of it in some later 
passage. On the whole, the easiest way to understand both his 
theory of universals and his theory of matter and form is to set 
forth first the common-sense doctrine which is half of his view, 
and then to consider the Platonic modifications to which he 
subjects it. 

Up to a certain point, the theory of universals is quite simple. 
In language, there are proper names, and there are adjectives. 
The proper names apply to "things" or "persons," each of which 
is the only thing or person to which the name in question applies. 
The sun, the moon, France, Napoleon, are unique; there are not 
a number of instances of things to which these names apply. On 
the other hand, words like "cat," "dog," "man" apply to many 
different things. The problem of universals is concerned with 
the meanings of such words, and also of adjectives, such as 
"white," "hard," "round," and so on. He says: 1 "By the term 
'universal' I mean that which is of such a nature as to be pre- 
dicated of many subjects, by 'individual' that which is not thus 
predicated." 

What is signified by a proper name is a "substance/* while 
what is signified by an adjective or class-name, such as "human" 
or "man," is called a "universal." A substance is a "this," but a 
universal is a "such" it indicates the sort of thing, not the actual 
particular thing. A universal is not a substance, because it is not 
a "this." (Plato's heavenly bed would be a "this" to those who 
could perceive it ; this is a matter as to which Aristotle disagrees 
with Plato.) "It seems impossible," Aristotle says, "that any uni- 
versal term should be the name of a substance. For . . . the 
substance of each thing is that which is peculiar to it, which does 
not belong to anything else; but the universal is common, since 
that is called universal which is sUch as to belong to more than 
one thing." The gist of the matter, so far, is that a universal 
cannot exist by itself, but only in particular things. 

Superficially, Aristotle's doctrine is plain enough. Suppose I 

say "there is such a thing as the game of football," most people 

would regard the remark as a truism. But if I were to infer that 

football could exist without football-players, I should be rightly 

1 'to Interpretation, 17*. 

185 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

held to be talking nonsense. Similarly, it would be held, there is 
such a thing as parenthood, but only because there are parents; 
there is such a thing as sweetness, but only because there are 
sweet things; and there is redness, but only because there are 
red things. And this dependence is thought to be not reciprocal : 
the men who play football would still exist even if they never 
played football; things which are usually sweet may turn sour; 
and my face, which is usually red, may turn pale without ceasing 
to be my face. In this way we are led to conclude that what is 
meant by an adjective is dependent for its being on what is meant 
by a proper name, but not vice versa. This is, I think, what 
Aristotle means. His doctrine on this point, as on many others, 
is a common-sense prejudice pedantically expressed. 

But it is not easy to give precision to the theory. Granted that 
football could not exist without football-players, it could perfectly 
well exist without this or that football-player. And granted that a 
person can exist without playing football, he nevertheless cannot 
exist without doing something. The quality redness cannot exist 
without some subject, but it can exist without this or that subject ; 
similarly a subject cannot exist without some quality, but can 
exist without this or that quality. The supposed ground for the 
distinction between things and qualities thus seems to be illusory. 

The true ground of the distinction is, in fact, linguistic; it is 
derived from syntax. There are proper names, adjectives, and 
relation- words ; we may say "John is wise, James is foolish, John 
is taller than James," Here "John" and "James" are proper 
names, "wise" and "foolish" are adjectives, and "taller" is a 
relation-word. Metaphysicians, ever since Aristotle, have inter- 
preted these syntactical differences metaphysically: John and 
James are substances, wisdom and folly are universal*. (Relation- 
words were ignored or misinterpreted.) It may be that, given 
sufficient care, metaphysical differences can be found that have 
some relation to these syntactical differences, but, if so, it will be 
only by means of a long process, involving, incidentally, the 
creation of an artificial philosophical language. And this language 
will contain no such names as "John" and "James/* and no such 
adjectives as "wise" and "foolish"; all the words of ordinary 
languages will have yielded to analysis, and been replaced by 
words having a less complex significance. Until this labour has 
been performed, the question of particulars and universals cannot 

186 



ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

be adequately discussed. And when we reach the point at which 
we can at last discuss it, we shall find that the question we are 
discussing is quite different from what we supposed it to be at 
the outset. 

If, therefore, I have failed to make Aristotle's theory of uni- 
versals clear, that is (I maintain) because it is not clear. But it is 
certainly an advance on the theory of ideas, and is certainly con- 
cerned with a genuine and very important problem. 

There is another term which is important in Aristotle and in 
his scholastic followers, and that is the term "essence." This is 
by no means synonymous with "universal." Your "essence" is 
"what you are by your very nature." It is, one may say, those of 
your properties which you cannot lose without ceasing to be your- 
self. Not only an individual thing, but a species, has an essence. 
The definition of a species should consist in mentioning its essence. 
I shall return to the conception of "essence" in connection with 
Aristotle's logic. For the present I will merely observe that it 
seems to me a muddle-headed notion, incapable of precision. 

The next point in Aristotle's metaphysics is the distinction of 
"form" and "matter. f> (It must be understood that "matter," in 
the sense in which it is opposed to "form," is different from 
"matter" as opposed to "mind.") 

Here, again, there is a common-sense basis for Aristotle's theory, 
but here, more than in the case of universals, the Platonic modifi- 
cations are very important. We may start with a marble statue; 
here marble is the matter, while the shape conferred by the 
sculptor is the form. Or, to take Aristotle's examples, if a man 
makes a bronze sphere, bronze is the matter, and sphericity is the 
form; while in the case of a calm sea, water is the matter and 
smoothness is the form. So far, all is simple. 

He goes on to say that it is in virtue of the form that the matter 
is some one definite thing, and this is the substance of the thing. 
What Aristotle means seems to be plain common sense: a "thing" 
must be bounded, and the boundary constitutes its form. Take, 
say, a volume of water: any part of it can be marked off from the 
rest by being enclosed in a vessel, and then this part becomes a 
* thing," but so long as the part is in no way marked out from the 
rest of the homogeneous mass it is not a "thing." A statue is a 
"thing," and the marble of which it is composed is, in a sense, 
unchanged from what it was as part of a lump or as part of the 

,8 7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

provided it is so used that we can translate our statements into 
a form in which the concept is absent. "A block of marble is a 
potential statue" means "from a block of marble, by suitable acts, 
a statue is produced." But when potentiality is used as a funda- 
mental and irreducible concept, it always conceals confusion of 
thought. Aristotle's use of it is one of the bad points in his 
system. 

Aristotle's theology is interesting, and closely connected with 
the rest of his metaphysics indeed, "theology" is one of his 
names for what we call "metaphysics." (The book which we know 
under that name was not so called by him.) 

There are, he says, three kinds of substances: those that are 
sensible and perishable, those that are sensible but not perishable, 
and those that are neither sensible nor perishable. The first class 
includes plants and animals, the second includes the heavenly 
bodies (which Aristotle believed to undergo no change except 
motion), the third includes the rational soul in man, and also 
God. 

The main argument for God is the First Cause: there must be 
something which originates motion, and this something must itself 
be unmoved, and must be eternal, substance, and actuality. The 
object of desire and the object of thought, Aristotle says, cause 
movement in this way, without themselves being in motion. So 
God produces motion by being loved, whereas every other cause 
of motion works by being itself in motion (like a billiard ball). 
God is pure thought ; for thought is what is best. "Life also belongs 
to God; for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that 
actuality; and God's self-dependent actuality is life most good 
and eternal. We say therefore that God is a living being, eternal, 
most good, so that life and duration continuous and eternal belong 
to God; for this is God" (1072*). 

"It is clear then from what has been said that there is a sub- 
stance which is eternal and unmovable and separate from sensible 
things. It has been shown that this substance cannot have any 
magnitude, but is without parts and indivisible. . . . But it has 
also been shown that it is impassive and unalterable; for all the 
other changes are posterior to change of place" (1073*). 

God does not have the attributes of a Christian Providence, for 
it would derogate from His perfection to think about anything 
except what is perfect, i.e. Himself "It must be of itself that the 

190 



ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

divine thought thinks (since it is the most excellent of things), 
and its thinking is a thinking on thinking." (1074*). We must infer 
that God does not know of the existence of our sublunary world. 
Aristotle, like Spinoza, holds that, while men must love God, 
it is impossible that God should love men. 

God is not definable as "the unmoved mover." On the contrary, 
astronomical considerations lead to the conclusion that there are 
either forty-seven or fifty-five unmoved movers (1074*). The 
relation of these to God is not made clear; indeed the natural 
interpretation would be that there are forty-seven or fifty-five 
gods. For after one of the above passages on God Aristotle pro- 
ceeds: "We must not ignore the question whether we are to 
suppose one such substance or more than one," and at once 
embarks upon the argument that leads to the forty-seven or 
fifty-five unmoved movers. 

The conception of an unmoved mover is a difficult one. To a 
modern mind, it would seem that the cause of a change must be a 
previous change, and that, if the universe were ever wholly static, 
it would remain so eternally. To understand what Aristotle means, 
we must take account of what he says about causes. There are, 
according to him, four kinds of causes, which were called, respec- 
tively, material, formal, efficient, and final. Let us take again the 
man who is making a statue. The material cause of the statue is 
the marble, the formal cause is the essence of the statue to be 
produced, the efficient cause is the contact of the chisel with the 
marble, and the final cause is the end that the sculptor has in 
view. In modern terminology, the word "cause" would be con- 
fined to the efficient cause. The unmoved mover may be regarded 
as a final cause : it supplies a purpose for change, which is essentially 
an evolution towards likeness with God. 

I said that Aristotle was not by temperament deeply religious, 
but this is only partly true. One could, perhaps, interpret one 
aspect of his religion, somewhat freely, as follows: 

God exists eternally, as pure thought, happiness, complete self- 
fulfilment, without any unrealized purposes. The sensible world, 
oo the contrary, is imperfect, but it has life, desire, thought of an 
imperfect kind, and aspiration. All living things are in a greater 
or less degree aware of God, and are moved to action by admira- 
tion and love of God. Thus God is the final cause of all activity. 
Change consists in giving form to matter, but, where sensible 

191 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

things are concerned, a substratum of matter always remains. 
Only God consists of form without matter. The world is con- 
tinually evolving towards a greater degree of form, and thus 
becoming progressively more like God. But the process cannot 
be completed, because matter cannot be wholly eliminated. This 
is a religion of progress and evolution, for God's static perfection 
moves the world only through the love that finite beings feel for 
Him. Plato was mathematical, Aristotle was biological; this 
accounts for the differences in their religions. 

This would, however, be a one-sided view of Aristotle's religion ; 
he has also the Greek love of static perfection and preference for 
contemplation rather than action. His doctrine of the soul 
illustrates this aspect of his philosophy. 

Whether Aristotle taught immortality in any form, or not, was 
a vexed question among commentators. Avenoes, who held that 
he did not, had followers in Christian countries, of whom the 
more extreme were called Epicureans, and whom Dante found in 
hell. In fact, Aristotle's doctrine is complex, and easily lends itself 
to misunderstandings. In his book On the Soul, he regards the 
soul as bound up with the body, and ridicules the Pythagorean 
doctrine of transmigration (407*). The soul, it seems, perishes 
with the body: "it indubitably follows that the soul is inseparable 
from its body" (4x3*); but he immediately adds: "or at any rate 
certain parts of it are." Body and soul are related as matter and 
form: "the soul must be a substance in the sense of the form of 
a material body having life potentially within it. But substance is 
actuality, and thus soul is the actuality of a body as above charac- 
terized" (412*). Soul "is substance in the sense which corresponds 
to the definitive formula of a thing's essence. That means that it 
is the 'essential whatness' of a body of the character just assigned 1 ' 
(i.e. having Hfe) (412*). The soul is the first grade of actuality of 
a natural body having life potentially in it. The body so described 
is a body which is organized (412*). To ask whether soul and body 
are one is as meaningless as to ask whether the wax and the shape 
given it by the stamp are one (412*). Self nutrition is the only 
psychic power possessed by plants (413'). The soul is the final 
cause of the body (414"). 

In this book, he distinguishes between "soul" and "mind," 
making mind higher than soul, and less bound to the body. After 
peaking of the relation of soul and body, he says: "The case of 

192 



ARISTOTLE'S METAPHYSICS 

mind is different; it seems to be an independent substance im- 
planted within the soul and to be incapable of being destroyed" 
(408*). Again: "We have no evidence as yet about mind or the 
power to think; it seems to be a widely different kind of soul, 
differing as what is eternal from what is perishable; it alone is 
capable of existence in isolation from all other psychic powers. 
All the other parts of soul, it is evident from what we have said, 
are, in spite of certain statements to the contrary, incapable of 
separate existence** (413*). The mind is the part of us that under- 
stands mathematics and philosophy; its objects are timeless, and 
therefore it is regarded as itself timeless. The soul is what moves 
the body and perceives sensible objects ; it is characterized by self- 
nutrition, sensation, feeling, and motivity (413*); but the mind 
has the higher function of thinking, which has no relation to the 
body or to the senses. Hence the mind can be immortal, though 
the rest of the soul cannot. 

To understand Aristotle's doctrine of the soul, we must re- 
member that the soul is the "form" of the body, and that spatial 
shape is one kind of "form." What is there in common between 
soul and shape? I think what is in common is the conferring of 
unity upon a certain amount of matter. The part of a block of 
marble which afterwards becomes a statue is, as yet, not separated 
from the rest of the marble; it is not yet a "thing," and has not 
yet any unity. After the sculptor has made the statue, it has unity, 
which it derives from its shape. Now the essential feature of the 
soul, in virtue of which it is the "form" of the body, is that it 
makes the body an organic whole, having purposes as a unit. A 
single organ has purposes lying outside itself; the eye, in isolation, 
cannot see. Thus many things can be said in which an animal or 
plant as a whole is the subject, which cannot be said about any 
part of it. It is in this sense that organization, or form, confers 
substantiality. That which confers substantiality upon a plant or 
animal is what Aristotle calls its "soul/ 1 But "mind" is some- 
thing different, less intimately bound up with the body; perhaps 
it is a part of the soul, but it is possessed by only a small minority 
of living beings (415"). Mind as speculation cannot be the cause 
of movement, for it never thinks about what is practicable, and 
never says what is to be avoided or what pursued (432*). 

A similar doctrine, though with a slight change of terminology, 
is set forth in the Nicomachean Ethics. There is in the soul one 

Hukiry / H' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

element that is rational, and one that is irrational. The irrational 
part is two-fold: the vegetative, which is found in everything 
living, even in plants, and the appetitive, which exists in all 
animals (1102*). The life of the rational soul consists in contem- 
plation, which is the complete happiness of man though not fully 
attainable. "Such a life would be too high for man; for it is not 
in so far as he is man that he will live so, but in so far as something 
divine is present in him ; and by so much as this is superior to our 
composite nature is its activity superior to that which is the 
exercise of the other kind of virtue (the practical kind). If reason 
is divine, then, in comparison with man, the life in accordance 
with it is divine in comparison with human life. But we must not 
follow those who advise us, being men, to think of human things, 
and being mortal, of mortal things, but must, so far as we can, 
make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live in accord- 
ance with the best thing in us; for even if it be small in bulk, 
much more does it in power and worth surpass everything" ( 1 177'). 
It seems, from these passages, that individuality what distin- 
guishes one man from another is connected with the body and 
the irrational soul, while the rational soul or mind is divine and 
impersonal. One man likes oysters, and another likes pineapples; 
this distinguishes between them. But when they think about the 
multiplication table, provided they think correctly, there is no 
difference between them. The irrational separates us, the rational 
unites us. Thus the immortality of mind or reason is not a personal 
immortality of separate men, but a share in God's immortality. 
It does not appear that Aristotle believed in personal immortality, 
in the sense in which it was taught by Plato and afterwards by 
Christianity. He believed only that, in so far as men are rational, 
they partake of the divine, which is immortal. It is open to man 
to increase the element of the divine in his nature, and to do so 
is the highest virtue. But if he succeeded completely, he would 
have ceased to exist as a separate person. This is perhaps not the 
only possible interpretation of Aristotle's words, but I think it is 
the most natural. 



'94 



Chapter XX 
ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

IN the corpus of Aristotle's works, three treatises on ethics have 
a place, but two of these are now generally held to be by dis- 
ciples. The third, the Nicomachean Ethics, remains for the most 
part unquestioned as to authenticity, but even in this book there 
is a portion (Books V, VI, and VII) which is held by many to have 
been incorporated from one of the works of disciples. I shall, 
however, ignore this controversial question, and treat the book as 
a whole and as Aristotle's. 

The views of Aristotle on ethics represent, in the main, the pre- 
vailing opinions of educated and experienced men of his day. 
They are not, like Plato's, impregnated with mystical religion; nor 
do they countenance such unorthodox theories as are to be found 
in the Republic concerning property and the family. Those who 
neither fall below nor rise above the level of decent, well-behaved 
citizens mil find in the Ethics a systematic account of the prin- 
ciples by which they hold that their conduct should be regulated. 
Those who demand anything more will be disappointed. The 
book appeals to the respectable middle-aged, and has been used 
by them, especially since the seventeenth century, to repress the 
ardours and enthusiasms of the young. But to a man with any 
depth of feeling it is likely to be repulsive. 

The good, we are told, is happiness, which is an activity of the 
soul. Aristotle says that Plato was right in dividing the soul into 
two parts, one rational, the other irrational. The irrational part 
itself he divides into the vegetative (which is found even in plants) 
and the appetitive (which is found in all animals). The appetitive 
part may be in some degree rational, when the goods that it seeks 
arc such as reason approves of. This is essential to the account of 
virtue, for reason alone, in Aristotle, is purely contemplative, and 
docs not, without the help of appetite, lead to any practical 
activity. 

There are two kinds of virtues, intellectual and moral, corre- 
sponding to the two parts of the soul. Intellectual virtues result 
from teaching, moral virtues from habit. It is the business of the 
legislator to make the citizens good by forming good habits. We 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

become just by performing just acts, and similarly as regards 
other virtues. By being compelled to acquire good habits, we shall 
in time, Aristotle thinks, come to find pleasure in performing good 
actions. One is reminded of Hamlet's speech to his mother: 

Assume a virtue if you have it not. 

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, 

Of habits devil, is angel, yet in this 

That to the use of actions fair and good 

He likewise gives a frock or livery 

That aptly is put on. 

We now come to the famous doctrine of the golden mean. 
Every virtue is a mean between two extremes, each of which is a 
vice. This is proved by an examination of the various virtues. 
Courage is a mean between cowardice and rashness; liberality, 
between prodigality and meanness ; proper pride, between vanity 
and humility; ready wit, between buffoonery and boorishness; 
modesty, between bashfulness and shamelessness. Some virtues 
do not seem to fit into this scheme; for instance, truthfulness. 
Aristotle says that this is a mean between boastfulness and mock- 
modesty (1108*), but this only applies to truthfulness about one- 
self. I do not see how truthfulness in any wider sense can be fitted 
into the scheme. There was once a mayor who had adopted 
Aristotle's doctrine ; at the end of his term of office he made a 
speech saying that he had endeavoured to steer the narrow line 
between partiality on the one hand and impartiality on the other. 
The view of truthfulness as a mean seems scarcely less absurd. 

Aristotle's opinions on moral questions are always such as were 
conventional in his day. On some points they differ from those of 
our time, chiefly where some form of aristocracy comes in. We 
think that human beings, at least in ethical theory, all have equal 
rights, and that justice involves equality; Aristotle thinks that 
justice involves, not equality, but right proportion, which is only 
sometimes equality (1131*). 

The justice of a master or a father is a different thing from that 
of a citizen, for a son or slave is property, and there can be no 
injustice to one's own property (i 134*). As regards stoves, however, 
there is a slight modification of this doctrine in connection with 
the question whether it is possible for a man to be a friend of his 
slave: "There is nothing in common between the two parties; the 
slave is a living tool. . . . Qua slave, then, one cannot be friends 

196 



ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

with him. But qua man one can ; for there seems to be some justice 
between any man and any other who can share in a system of 
law or be a party to an agreement; therefore there can also be 
friendship with him in so far as he is a man" (n6i 6 ). 

A father can repudiate his son if he is wicked, but a son cannot 
repudiate his father, because he owes him more than he can pos- 
sibly repay, especially existence (n63 6 ). In unequal relations, it is 
right, since everybody should be loved in proportion to his worth, 
that the inferior should love the superior more than the superior 
loves the inferior: wives, children, subjects, should have more love 
for husbands, parents, and monarchs than the latter have for 
them. In a good marriage, "the man rules in accordance with 
his worth, and in those matters in which a man should rule, but 
the matters that befit a woman he hands over to her" (1160*). 
He should not rule in her province; still less should she rule in 
his, as sometimes happens when she is an heiress. 

The best individual, as conceived by Aristotle, is a very different 
person from the Christian saint. He should have proper pride, and 
not underestimate his own merits. He should despise whoever 
deserves to be despised (1124*). The description of the proud or 
magnanimous man 1 is very interesting as showing the difference 
between pagan and Christian ethics, and the sense in which 
Nietzsche was justified in regarding Christianity as a slave- 
morality. 

The magnanimous man, since he deserves most, must be good, 
in the highest degree; for the better man always deserves more, 
and the best man most. Therefore the truly magnanimous man 
must be good. And greatness in every virtue would seem to be 
characteristic of the magnanimous man. And it would be most 
unbecoming for the magnanimous man to fly from danger, 
swinging his arms by his sides, or to wrong another; for to what 
end should he do disgraceful acts, he to whom nothing is great ? 
. . . magnanimity, then, seems to be a sort of crown of the 
virtues; for it makes them greater, and it is not found without 
them. Therefore it is hard to be truly magnanimous; for it is 

1 The Greek word means, literally, "great-souled," and is usually 
translated "magnanimous, " but the Oxford translation renders it "proud.*' 
Neither word, in its modern usage, quite expresses Aristotle's meaning, 
but 1 prefrr"magnaninu>us," and have therefore substituted it for'* proud" 
in the above qtyotation from the Oxford translation. 

"97 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

impossible without nobility and goodness of character. It is 
chiefly with honours and dishonours, then, that the magnanimous 
man is concerned; and at honours that are great and conferred 
by good men he will be moderately pleased, thinking that he is 
coming by his own or even less than his own; for there can be 
no honour that is worthy of perfect virtue, yet he will at any rate 
accept it since they have nothing greater to bestow on him ; but 
honour from casual people and on trifling grounds he will utterly 
despise, since it is not this that he deserves, and dishonour too, 
since in his case it cannot be just. . . . Power and wealth arc 
desirable for the sake of honour; and to him for whom even 
honour is a little thing the others must be so too. Hence magnani- 
mous men are thought to be disdainful. . . . The magnanimous 
man does not run into trifling dangers, . . . but he will face great 
dangers, and when he is in danger he is unsparing of his life, 
knowing that there are conditions on which life is not worth 
having. And he is the sort of man to confer benefits, but he is 
ashamed of receiving them; for the one is the mark of a superior, 
the other of an inferior. And he is apt to confer greater benefits 
in return; for thus the original benefactor besides being repaid 
will incur a debt to him. ... It is the mark of the magnanimous 
man to ask for nothing or scarcely anything, but to give help 
readily, and to be dignified towards people who enjoy a hiuh 
position but unassuming towards those of the middle class; for 
it is a difficult and lofty thing to be superior to the former, but 
easy to be so to the latter, and a lofty bearing over the former is 
no mark of ill-breeding, but among humble people it is as vulgar 
as a display of strength against the weak. ... lie must also be 
open in his hate and in his love, for to conceal one's feelings, 
i.e. to care less for truth than for what people think, is a coward's 
part. . . . He is free of speech because he is contemptuous, and 
he is given to telling the truth, except when he speaks in irony 
to the vulgar. . . . Nor is he given to admiration, for to him nothing 
is great. . . . Nor is he a gossip; for he will speak neither about 
himself nor about another, since he cares not to be praised nor 
for others to be blamed. ... He is one who will possess beautiful 
and profitless things rather than profitable and useful ones, . . . 
Further, a slow step is thought proper to the magnanimous man, 
a deep voice, and a level utterance. . . . Such, then, is the magnani- 
mous man; the man who falls short of him is unduly humble 
and the man who goes beyond him is vain" (1123*-! 125*). 

One shudders to think what a vain man would b? like. 
Whatc/er may be thought of the magnanimous pun, one thing 



ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

is clear: there cannot be very many of him in a community. I do 
not mean merely in the general sense in which there are not likely 
to be many virtuous men, on the ground that virtue is difficult; 
what I mean is that the virtues of the magnanimous man largely 
depend upon his having an exceptional social position. Aristotle 
considers ethics a branch of politics, and it is not surprising, after 
his praise of pride, to find that he considers monarchy the best 
form of government, and aristocracy the next best. Monarchs and 
aristocrats can be "magnanimous," but ordinary citizens would 
be laughable if they attempted to live up to such a pattern. 

This brings up a question which is half ethical, half political. 
Can we regard as morally satisfactory a community which, by its 
essential constitution, confines the best things to a few, and 
requires the majority to be content with the second-best? Plato 
and Aristotle say yes, and Nietzsche agrees with them. Stoics, 
Christians, and democrats say no. But there are great differences 
in their ways of saying no. Stoics and early Christians consider 
that the greatest pood is virtue, and that external circumstances 
cannot prevent a man from being virtuous; there is therefore no 
need to seek a just social system, since social injustice affects only 
unimportant matters. The democrat, on the contrary, usually 
holds that, at least so far as politics are concerned, the most 
important goods are power and property; he cannot, therefore, 
acquiesce in a social system which is unjust in these respects. 

The Stoic-Christian view requires a conception of virtue very 
different from Aristotle's, since it must hold that virtue is as 
possible for the slave as for his master. Christian ethics dis- 
approves of pride, which Aristotle thinks a virtue, and praises 
humility, which he thinks a vice. The intellectual virtues, which 
Plato and Aristotle value above all others, have to be thrust out 
of the list altogether, in order that the poor and humble may be 
able to be as virtuous as any one else. Pope Gregory the Great 
solemnly reproved a bishop for teaching grammar. 

The Aristotelian view, that the highest virtue is for the few, is 
logically connected with the subordination of ethics to politics, 
if the aim is the good community rather than the good individual, 
it i possible that the good community may be one in which there 
is subordination. In an orchestra, the first violin is more important 
than the oboe, though both arc necessary for the excellence of the 
whole. It is impossible to organize an orchestra on the principle 

199 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of giving to each man what would be best lor him as an isolated 
individual. The same sort of thing applies to the government of a 
large modern State, however democratic. A modern democracy 
unlike those of antiquity confers great power upon certain 
chosen individuals, Presidents or Prime Ministers, and must expect 
of them kinds of merit which are not expected of the ordinary 
citizen. When people are not thinking in terms of religion or 
political controversy, they are likely to hold that a good President 
is more to be honoured than a good bricklayer. In a democracy 
a President is not expected to be quite like Aristotle's magnani- 
mous man, but still he is expected to be rather different from the 
average citizen, and to have certain merits connected with his 
station. These peculiar merits would perhaps not be considered 
"ethical,* 1 but that is because we use this adjective in a narrower 
sense than that in which it is used by Aristotle. 

As a result of Christian dogma, the distinction between moral 
and other merits has become much sharper than it was in Greek 
times. It is a merit in a man to be a great poet or composer or 
painter, but not a moral merit; we do not consider him the more 
virtuous for possessing such aptitudes, or the more likely to go 
to heaven. Moral merit is concerned solely with acts of will, i.e. 
with choosing rightly among possible courses of action. 1 I am not 
to blame for not composing an opera, because I don't know how 
to do it. The orthodox view is that, wherever two courses of action 
are possible, conscience tells me which is right, and to choose the 
other is sin. Virtue consists mainly in the avoidance of sin, rather 
than in anything positive. There is no reason to expect an educated 
man to be morally better than an uneducated man, or a clever 
man than a stupid man. In this way, a number of merits of great 
social importance are shut out from the realm of ethics. The 
adjective "unethical," in modern usage, has a much narrower 
range than the adjective "undesirable. 11 It is undesirable to be 
feeble-minded, but not unethical. 

Many modern philosophers, however, have not accepted this 
view of ethics. They have thought that one should first define the 
good, and then say that our actions ought to be such as tend to 
realize the good. This point of view is more like that of Aristotle, 
who holds that happiness is the good. The highest happiness, it 

1 It i* true that Aristotle also say* this (i 105'), but as he means it the 
consequences are not so far-reaching as in the Christian interpretation. 

200 



ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

is true, is only open to the philosopher, but to Aristotle that is no 
objection to the theory. 

Ethical theories may be divided into two classes, according as 
they regard virtue as an end or a means. Aristotle, on the whole, 
takes the view that virtues are means to an end, namely happiness. 
"The end, then, being what we wish for, the means what we 
deliberate about and choose, actions concerning means must be 
according to choice and voluntary. Now the exercise of the virtues 
is concerned with means" (iii3 6 ). But there is another sense of 
virtue in which it is included in the ends of action: "Human good 
is activity of soul in accordance with virtue in a complete life" 
(1098*). I think he would say that the intellectual virtues are ends, 
but the practical virtues are only means. Christian moralists hold 
that, while the consequences of virtuous actions are in general 
good, they are not as good as the virtuous actions themselves, 
which are to be valued on their own account, and not on account 
of their effects. On the other hand, those who consider pleasure 
the good regard virtues solely as means. Any other definition of 
the good, except the definition as virtue, will have the same conse- 
quence, that virtues are means to goods other than themselves. 
On this question, Aristotle, as already said, agrees mainly, though 
not wholly, with those who think the first business of ethics is to 
define the good, and that virtue is to be defined as action tending 
to produce the good. 

The relation of ethics to politics raises another ethical question 
of considerable importance. Granted that the good at which right 
action should aim is the good of the whole community, or, ulti- 
mately, of the whole human race, is this social good a sum of 
goods enjoyed by individuals, or is it something belonging 
essentially to the whole, not to the parts ? We may illustrate the 
problem by the analogy of the human body. Pleasures are largely 
associated with different parts of the body, but we consider them 
as belonging to a person as a whole; we may enjoy a pleasant 
smell, but we know that the nose alone could not enjoy it. Some 
contend that, in a closely organized community, there are, analo- 
gously, excellences belonging to the whole, but not to any part. 
If they are metaphysicians, they may hold, like Hegel, that what- 
ever quality is good is an attribute of the universe as a whole; 
but they will generally add that it is less mistaken to attribute good 
to a State thap to an individual. logically, the view may be put 

201 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as follows. We can attribute to a State various predicates that 
cannot be attributed to its separate members that it is populous, 
extensive, powerful, etc. The view we are considering puts ethical 
predicates in this class, and says that they only derivatively belong 
to individuals. A man may belong to a populous State, or to a 
good State; but he, they say, is no more good than he is populous. 
This view, which has been widely held by German philosophers, 
is not Aristotle's, except possibly, in some degree, in his conception 
of justice. 

A considerable part of the Ethics is occupied with the discussion 
of friendship, including all relations that involve affection. Perfect 
friendship is only possible between the good, and it is impossible 
to be friends with many people. One should not be friends with a 
person of higher station than one's own, unless he is also of higher 
virtue, which will justify the respect shown to him. \Ve have seen 
that, in unequal relations, such as those of man and wife or father 
and son, the superior should be the more loved. It is impossible 
to be friends with God, because He cannot love us. Aristotle 
discusses whether a man can be a friend to himself, and decides 
that this is only possible if he is a good man; wicked men, he 
asserts, often hate themselves. The good man should love himself, 
but nobly (1169*). Friends are a comfort in misfortune, but one 
should not make them unhappy by seeking their sympathy, as is 
done by women and womanish men (1171*). It is not only in 
misfortune that friends are desirable, for the happy man needs 
friends with whom to share his happiness. "No one would choose 
the whole world on condition of being alone, since man is a 
political creature and one whose nature is to live with others" 
(1169*). All that is said about friendship is sensible, but there is 
not a word that rises above common sense. 

Aristotle again shows his good sense in the discussion of pleasure, 
which Plato had regarded somewhat ascetically. Pleasure, as 
Aristotle uses the word, is distinct from happiness, though there 
can be no happiness without pleasure. There are, he says, three 
views of pleasure: (i) that it is never good; (2) that some pleasure- 
is good, but most is bad; (3) that pleasure is good, but not the 
best. He rejects the first of these on the ground that pain is cer- 
tainly bad, and therefore pleasure must be good. He says, very 
justly, that it is nonsense to say a man can be happy on the rack : 
some degree of external good fortune is necessary for happiness. 

202 



ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

tie also disposes of the view that all pleasures are bodily ; all things 
have something divine, and therefore some capacity for higher 
pleasures. Good men have pleasure unless they are unfortunate, 
and God always enjoys a single and simple pleasure (1152-1154). 

There is another discussion of pleasure, in a later pan of the 
book, which is not wholly consistent with the above. Here it is 
argued that there are bad pleasures, which, however, are not 
pleasures to pood people (1173*); that perhaps pleasures differ in 
kind (ibid.) ; and that pleasures are good or bad according as they 
are connected with good or bad activities (1175*). There are things 
that are valued more than pleasure; no one would be content to 
go through life with a child's intellect, even if it were pleasant to 
do so. Each animal has its proper pleasure, and the proper pleasure 
of man is connected with reason. 

This leads on to the only doctrine in the book which is not mere 
common sense. Happiness lies in virtuous activity, and perfect 
happiness lies in the best activity, which is contemplative. Con- 
templation is preferable to war or politics or any other practical 
career, because it allows leisure, and leisure is essential to happi- 
ness. Practical virtue brings only a secondary kind of happiness; 
the supreme happiness is in the exercise of reason, for reason, 
more than anything else, is man. Man cannot be wholly contem- 
plative, but in so far as he is so he shares in the divine life. "The 
activity of God, which surpasses all others in blessedness, must 
be contemplative." Of all human beings, the philosopher is the 
most godlike in his activity, and therefore the happiest and best: 

I Ic who exercises his reason and cultivates it seems to be both 
in the be*t state of mind and most dear to the gods. For if the gods 
have any care for human affairs, as they are thought to have, it 
would be reasonable both that they should delight in that which 
was best and most akin to them (i.e. reason) and that they should 
reward those who love and honour this most, as caring for the 
things that are dear to them and acting both rightly and nobly. 
And that all these attributes belong most of all to the philosopher 
is manifest. He, therefore, is the dearest to the gods. And he who 
is that will presumably be also the happiest; so that in this way 
too the philosopher will more than any other be happy (1179*). 

This passage is virtually the peroration of the Ethics-, the few 

paragraphs that follow are concerned with the transition to politics. 

Let us now try to decide what we are to think of the merits and 

203 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

demerits of the Ethics. Unlike many other subjects treated by 
Greek philosophers, ethics has not made any definite advances, 
in the sense of ascertained discoveries ; nothing in ethics is known 
in a scientific sense. There is therefore no reason why an ancient 
treatise on it should be in any respect inferior to a modern one. 
When Aristotle talks about astronomy, we can say definitely that 
he is wrong; but when he talks about ethics we cannot say, in 
the same sense, either that he is wrong or that he is right. Broadly 
speaking, there are three questions that we can ask about the 
ethics of Aristotle, or of any other philosopher: (i) Is it internally 
self-consistent? (2) Is it consistent with the remainder of the 
author's views ? (3) Does it give answers to ethical problems that 
are consonant to our own ethical feelings ? If the answer to cither 
the first or second question is in the negative, the philosopher in 
question has been guilty of some intellectual error. But if the 
answer to the third question is in the negative, we have no right 
to say that he is mistaken ; we have only the right to say that we 
do not like him. 

Let us examine these three questions in turn, as regards the 
ethical theory set forth in the Nicomachean Ethics. 

(1) On the whole, the book is self-consistent, except in a few 
not very important respects. The doctrine that the good is happi- 
ness, and that happiness consists in successful activity, is well 
worked out. The doctrine that every virtue is a mean between 
two extremes, though very ingeniously developed, is less successful, 
since it does not apply to intellectual contemplation, which, we 
are told, is the best of all activities. It can, however, be maintained 
that the doctrine of the mean is only intended to apply to the 
practical virtues, not to, those of the intellect. Perhaps, to take 
another point, the position of the legislator is somewhat ambiguous. 
He is to cause children and young people to acquire the habit of 
performing good actions, which mil, in the end, lead them to find 
pleasure in virtue, and to act virtuously without the need of legal 
compulsion. It is obvious that the legislator might equally well 
cause the young to acquire bad habits; if this is to be avoided, he 
must have all the wisdom of a Platonic guardian ; and if it is not 
avoided, the argument that a virtuous life is pleasant will fail. 
This problem, however, belongs perhaps more to politics than 
to ethics. 

(2) Aristotle's ethics is, at all points, consistent with his meta- 

204 



ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 

physics. Indeed, his metaphysical theories are themselves the 
expression of an ethical optimism. He believes in the scientific 
importance of final causes, and this implies the belief that purpose 
governs the course of development in the universe. He thinks 
that changes are, in the main, such as embody an increase of 
organization or "form," and at bottom virtuous actions are those 
that favour this tendency. It is true that a great deal of his practical 
ethics is not particularly philosophical, but merely the result of 
observation of human affairs ; but this part of his doctrine, though 
it may be independent of his metaphysics, is not inconsistent 
with it. 

(3) When we come to compare Aristotle's ethical tastes with 
our own, we find, in the first place, as already noted, an acceptance 
of inequality which is repugnant to much modern sentiment. 
Not only is there no objection to slavery, or to the superiority 
of husbands and fathers over wives and children, but it is held 
that what is best is essentially only for the few magnanimous 
men and philosophers. Most men, it would seem to follow, are 
mainly means for the production of a few rulers and sages. Kant 
maintained that every human being is an end in himself, and this 
may be taken as an expression of the view introduced by Christi- 
anity. There is, however, a logical difficulty in Kant's view, since 
it gives no means of reaching a decision when two men's interests 
clash. If each is an end in himself, how are we to arrive at a prin- 
ciple for determining which shall give way? Such a principle 
must have to do with the community rather than with the indi- 
vidual. In the broadest sense of the word, it will have to be a 
principle of "justice." Benthum and the utilitarians interpret 
"justice" as "equality": when two men's interests clash, the right 
course is that which produces the greatest total of happiness, 
regardless of which of the two enjoys it, or how it is shared among 
them. If more is given to the better man than to the worse, that 
is because, in the long run, the general happiness is increased by 
rewarding virtue and punishing vice, not because of an ultimate 
ethical doctrine that the good deserve more than the bad. "Justice," 
in this view, consists in considering only the amount of happiness 
involved, without favour to one individual or class as against 
another. Greek philosophers, including Plato and Aristotle, had 
a different conception of justice, and it is one which is still widely 
prevalent. They thought originally on grounds derived from 

205 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

religion that each thing or person had its or his proper sphere, 
to overstep which is "unjust." Some men, in virtue of their 
character and aptitudes, have a wider sphere than others, and 
there is no injustice if they enjoy a greater share of happiness. 
This view is taken for granted in Aristotle, but its basis in primitive 
religion, which is evident in the earliest philosophers, is no longer 
apparent in his writings. 

There is in Aristotle an almost complete absence of what may 
be called benevolence or philanthropy. The sufferings of mankind, 
in so far as he is aware of them do not move him emotionally; 
he holds them, intellectually, to be an evil, but there is no evidence 
that they cause him unhappiness except when the sufferers happen 
to be his friends. 

More generally, there is an emotional poverty in the Ethics, 
which is not found in the earlier philosophers. There is something 
unduly smug and comfortable about Aristotle's speculations on 
human affairs; everything that makes men feel a passionate interest 
in each other seems to be forgotten. Even his account of friend- 
ship is tepid. He shows no sign of having had any of those experi- 
ences which make it difficult to preserve sanity; all the more 
profound aspects of the moral life are apparently unknown to him. 
He leaves out, one may say, the whole sphere of human experi- 
ence with which religion is concerned. What he ha,s to say is 
what will be useful to comfortable men of weak passions; but he 
has nothing to say to those who are possessed by a god or a devil, 
or whom outward misfortune drives to despair. For these reasons, 
in my judgment, his Ethics, in spite of its fame, is lacking in 
intrinsic importance. 



206 



Chapter XXI 
ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

ARISTOTLE'S Politics is both interesting and important 
interesting, as showing the common prejudices of educated 
Greeks in his time, and important as a source of many prin- 
ciples which remained influential until the end of the Middle 
Ages. I do not think there is much in it that could be of any practical 
use to a statesman of the present day, but there is a great deal 
that throws light on the conflicts of parties in different parts of 
the Hellenic world. There is not very much awareness of methods 
of government in non-Hellenic States. There are, it is true, 
allusions to Egypt, Babylon, Persia, and Carthage, but except in 
the case of Carthage they are somewhat perfunctory. There is 
no mention of Alexander, and not even the faintest awareness of 
the complete transformation that he was effecting in the world. 
The whole discussion is concerned with City States, and there is 
no prevision of their obsolescence. Greece, owing to its division 
into independent cities, was a laboratory of political experiment; 
but nothing to which these experiments were relevant existed 
from Aristotle's time until the rise of the Italian cities in the Middle 
Ages. In many ways, the experience to which Aristotle appeals is 
more relevant to the comparatively modern world than to any 
that existed for fifteen hundred years after the book was written. 
There are many pleasant incidental remarks, some of which 
may be noted before we embark upon political theory. We are 
told that Euripides, when he was staying at the court of Archelaus, 
King of Macedon, was accused of halitosis by a certain Decam- 
nichus. To soothe his fury, the king gave him permission to 
scourge Decarnnichus, which he did. Decamnichus, after waiting 
many years, joined in a successful plot to kill the king; but by 
this time Euripides was dead. We are told that children should 
be conceived in winter, when the wind is in the north ; that there 
must be a careful avoidance of indecency, because "shameful 
words lead to shameful acts," and that obscenity is never to be 
tolerated except in temples, where the law permits even ribaldry. 
People should not marry too young, because, if they do, the 
children will be weak and female, the wives will become wanton, 

307 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and the husbands stunted in their growth. The right age for 
marriage is thirty-seven in men, eighteen in women. 

We learn how Thales, being taunted with his poverty, bought up 
all the olive-presses on the instalment plan, and was then able to 
charge monopoly rates for their use. This he did to show that 
philosophers can make money, and, if they remain poor, it is 
because they have something more important than wealth to 
think about. All this, however, is by the way ; it is time to come to 
more serious matters. 

The book begins by pointing out the importance of the State ; 
it is the highest kind of community, and aims at the highest good. 
In order of time, the family comes first ; it is built on the two 
fundamental relations of man and woman, master and slave, both 
of which are natural. Several families combined make a village ; 
several villages, a State, provided the combination is nearly large 
enough to be self-sufficing. The State, though later in time than 
the family, is prior to it, and even to the individual, by nature; 
for "what each thing is when fully developed we call its nature/' 
and human society, fully developed, is a State, and the whole 
is prior to the part. The conception involved here is that of 
organism: a hand, when the body is destroyed, is, we are told, no 
longer a hand. The implication is that a hand is to be defined by 
its purpose that of grasping which it can only perform when 
joined to a living body. In like manner an individual cannot fulfil 
his purpose unless he is part of a State. He who founded the 
State, Aristotle says, was the greatest of benefactors; for without 
law man is the worst of animals, and law depends for its existence 
on the State. The State is not a mere society for exchange and the 
prevention of crime: "The end of the State is the good life. 
. . . And the State is the union of families and villages in a 
perfect and self-sufficing life, by which we mean a happy and 
honourable life" (1280*). "A political society exists for the sake 
of noble actions, not of mere companionship" (1281). 

A State being composed of households, each of which consists 
of one family, the discussion of politics should begin with the 
family. The bulk of this discussion is concerned with slavery 
for in antiquity the slaves were always reckoned as pan of the 
family. Slavery is expedient and right, but the slave should be 
naturally inferior to the master. From birth, some are marked out 
for subjection, others for rule; the man who is by nature not his 

208 



ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

own but another man's is by nature a slave. Slaves should not be 
Greeks, but of an inferior race with less spirit (1255* and 1330*). 
Tame animals are better off when ruled by man, and so are those 
who are naturally inferior when ruled by their superiors. It may 
be questioned whether the practice of making slaves out of 
prisoners of war is justified ; power, such as leads to victory in 
war, seems to imply superior virtue, but this is not always the 
case. War, however, is just when waged against men who, though 
intended by nature to be governed, will not submit (1256*); and 
in this case, it is implied, it would be right to make slaves of the 
conquered. This would seem enough to justify any conqueror who 
ever lived ; for no nation will admit that it is intended by nature to 
be governed, and the only evidence as to nature's intentions 
must be derived from the outcome of war. In every war, therefore, 
the victors are in the right and the vanquished in the wrong. 
Very satisfactory ! 

Next comes a discussion of trade, which profoundly influenced 
scholastic casuistry. There are two uses of a thing, one proper, 
the other improper; a shoe, for instance, may be worn, which is 
its proper use, or exchanged, which is its improper use. It follows 
that there is something degraded about a shoemaker, who must 
exchange his shoes in order to live. Retail trade, we are told, is 
not a natural part of the art of getting wealth (1257*). The natural 
way to get wealth is by skilful management of house and land. 
To the wealth that can be made in this way there is a limit, but 
to what can be made by trade there is none. Trade has to do with 
money, but wealth is not the acquisition of coin. Wealth derived 
from trade is justly hated, because it is unnatural. "The most 
hated sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury, which makes 
a gain out of money itself, and not from the natural object of it. 
For money was intended to be used in exchange, but not to increase 
at interest. ... Of all modes of getting wealth this is the most 
unnatural" (1258). 

What came of this dictum you may read in Tawney's Religion 
and the Rise oj Capitalism. But while his history is reliable, his 
comment has a bias in favour of what is pre-capitalistic. 

44 Usury" means all lending money at interest, not only, as now, 
lending at an exorbitant rate. From Greek times to the present 
day, mankind, or at least the economically more developed 
portion of them, have been divided into debtors and creditors; 

209 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

debtors have disapproved of interest, and creditors have approved 
of it. At most times, landowners have been debtors, while men 
engaged in commerce have been creditors. The views of philo- 
sophers, with few exceptions, have coincided with the pecuniary 
interests of their class. Greek philosophers belonged to, or were 
employed by, the landowning class; they therefore disapproved 
of interest. Medieval philosophers were churchmen, and the 
property of the Church was mainly in land ; they therefore saw 
no reason to revise Aristotle's opinion. Their objection to usury 
was reinforced by anti-Semitism, for most fluid capital was 
Jewish. Ecclesiastics and barons had their quarrels, sometimes 
very bitter; but they could combine against the wicked Jew who 
had tided them over a bad harvest by means of a loan, and con- 
sidered that he deserved some reward for his thrift. 

With the Reformation, the situation changed. Many of the 
most earnest Protestants were business men, to whom lending 
money at interest was essential. Consequently first Calvin, and 
then other Protestant divines, sanctioned interest. At last the 
Catholic Church was compelled to follow suit, because the old 
prohibitions did not suit the modern world. Philosophers, whose 
incomes are derived from the investments of universities, have 
favoured interest ever since they ceased to be ecclesiastics and 
therefore connected with landowning. At every stage, theie has 
been a wealth of theoretical argument to support the economically 
convenient opinion. 

Plato's Utopia is criticized by Aristotle on various grounds. 
There is first the very interesting comment that it gives too much 
unity to the State, and would make it into an individual. Next 
comes the kind of argument against the proposed abolition of the 
family that naturally occurs to every reader. Plato thinks that, by 
merely giving the title of "son'* to all who are of an age that makes 
their sonship possible, a man will acquire towards the whole 
multitude the sentiments that men have at present towards their 
actual sons, and correlatively as regards the title "father/* Aristotle, 
on the contrary, says that what is common to the greatest number 
receives the least care, and that if "sons' 1 are common to many 
"fathers" they will be neglected in common; it is better to be 
a cousin in reality than a "son" in Plato's sense ; Plato's plan would 
make love watery. Then there is a curious argument that, since 
abstinence from adultery is a virtue, it would be a pity to have 

210 



ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

a social system which abolishes this virtue and the correlative 
vice (1263*). Then we are asked: if women are common, who 
will manage the house ? I wrote an essay once, called "Architecture 
and the Social System," in which I pointed out that all who 
combine communism with abolition of the family also advocate 
communal houses for large numbers, with communal kitchens, 
dining-rooms, and nurseries. This system may be described as 
monasteries without celibacy. It is essential to the carrying out of 
Plato's plans, but it is certainly not more impossible than many 
other things that he recommends. 

Plato's communism annoys Aristotle. It would lead, he says, 
to anger against lazy people, and to the sort of quarrels that are 
common between fellow-travellers. It is better if each minds his 
own business. Property should be private, but people should be 
so trained in benevolence as to allow the use of it to be largely 
common. Benevolence and generosity are virtues, and without 
pr vate property they are impossible. Finally we are told that, if 
Plato's plans were good, someone would have thought of them 
sooner. 1 I do not agree with Plato, but if anything could make 
me do so, it would be Aristotle's arguments against him. 

As we have seen in connection with slavery, Aristotle is no 
Miever in equality. Granted, however, the subjection of slaves 
and women, it still remains a question whether all citizens should 
be politically equal. Some men, he says, think this desirable, on 
the ground that all revolutions turn on the regulation of property, 
lie rejects this argument, maintaining that the greatest crimes 
are due to excess rather than want ; no man becomes a tyrant in 
order to avoid feeling the cold. 

A government is good when it aims at the good of the whole 
community, bad when it cares only for itself. There are three kinds 
of government that are good: monarchy, aristocracy, and consti- 
tutional government (or polity); there are three that are bad: 
tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy. There are also many mixed 
intermediate forms. It will be observed that the good and bad 
governments are defined by the ethical qualities of the holders of 
power, not by the form of the constitution. This, however, is 

1 Ct. Tlit Noodle's Oration in Sydney Smith; "If the proposal be 
bound, would the Saxon have passed it by ? Would the Dane have ignored 
it? Would it have escaped the wisdom of the Norman?" (I quote from 
memory. ) 

211 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

only partly true. An aristocracy is a rule of men of virtue, an 
oligarchy is a rule of the rich, and Aristotle does not consider 
virtue and wealth strictly synonymous. What he holds, in accord- 
ance with the doctrine of the golden mean, is that a moderate 
competence is most likely to be associated with virtue: "Mankind 
do not acquire or preserve virtue by the help of external goods, 
but external goods by the help of virtue, and happiness, whether 
consisting in pleasure or virtue, or both, is more often found 
with those who are most highly cultivated in their mind and in 
their character, and have only a moderate share of external poods, 
than among those who possess external goods to a useless extent 
but are deficient in higher qualities*' (1323* and ')- There is 
therefore a difference between the rule of the best (aristocracy) 
and of the richest (oligarchy), since the best are likely to have 
only moderate fortunes. There is also a difference between demo- 
cracy and polity, in addition to the ethical difference in the govern- 
ment, for what Aristotle calls "polity" retains some oligarchic 
elements (1293*). But between monarchy and tyranny the only 
difference is ethical. 

He is emphatic in distinguishing oligarchy and democracy by 
the economic status of the governing party: there is oligarchy 
when the rich govern without consideration for the poor, demo- 
cracy when power is in the hands of the needy and they disregard 
the interest of the rich. 

Monarchy is better than aristocracy, aristocracy is better than 
polity. But the corruption of the best is worst ; therefore tyranny 
is worse than oligarchy, and oligarchy than democracy. In this 
way Aristotle arrives at a qualified defence of democracy; for 
most Actual governments are bad, and therefore, among actual 
governments, democracies tend to be best. 

The Greek conception of democracy was in many ways more 
extreme than ours; for instance, Aristotle says that to elect magis- 
trates is oligarchic, while it is democratic to appoint them by lot. 
In extreme democracies, the assembly of the citizens was above the 
law, and decided each question independently. The Athenian 
law-courts were composed of a large number of citizens chosen 
by lot, unaided by any jurist ; they were, of course, liable to be 
swayed by eloquence or party passion. When democracy is 
criticized, it must be understood that this sort of thing is 
meant. 

212 



ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

There is a long discussion of causes of revolution. In Greece, 
revolutions were as frequent as formerly in Latin America, and 
therefore Aristotle had a copious experience from which to draw 
inferences. The main cause was the conflict of oligarchs and 
democrats. Democracy, Aristotle says, arises from the belief that 
men who are equally free should be equal in all respects; oligarchy, 
from the fact that men who are superior in some respect claim 
too much. Both have a kind of justice, but not the best kind. 
"Therefore both parties, whenever their share in the government 
does not accord with their preconceived ideas, stir up revolution" 
(1301*). Democratic governments are less liable to revolutions 
than oligarchies, because oligarchs may fall out with each other. 
The oligarchs seem to have been vigorous fellows. In some cities, 
we are told, they swore an oath : "I will be an enemy to the people, 
and will devise all the harm against them which I can." Nowadays 
reactionaries are not so frank. 

The three things needed to prevent revolution are government 
propaganda in education, respect for law, even in small things, 
and justice in law and administration, i.e., "equality according 
to proportion, and for every man to enjoy his own" (1307*, 
I 37 b ^ *3 10 *)' Aristotle never seems to have realized the difficulty 
of "equality according to proportion." If this is to be true justice, 
the proportion must be of virtue. Now virtue is difficult to measure, 
and is a matter of party controversy. In political practice, therefore, 
virtue tends to be measured by income; the distinction between 
aristocracy and oligarchy, which Aristotle attempts to make, is 
only possible where there is a very well-established hereditary 
nobility. Even then, as soon as there exists a large class of rich 
men who are not noble, they have to be admitted to power for 
fear of their making a revolution. Hereditary aristocracies cannot 
long retain their power except where land is almost the only 
source of wealth. All social inequality, in the long run, is inequality 
of income. That is part of the argument for democracy: that the 
attempt to have a "proportionate justice" based on any merit 
other than wealth is sure to break down. Defenders of oligarchy 
pretend that income is proportional to virtue; the prophet said 
he had never seen a righteous man begging his bread, and Aristotle 
thinks that good men acquire just about his own income, neither 
very large nor very small. But such views are absurd. Eveiy kind 
of 4 'justice" other than absolute equality will, in practice, reward 

"3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

some quality quite other than virtue, and is therefore to be 
condemned. 

There is an interesting section on tyranny. A tyrant desires 
riches, whereas a king desires honour. The tyrant has guards who 
are mercenaries, whereas the king has guards who are citizens. 
Tyrants are mostly demagogues, who acquire power by promising 
to protect the people against the notables. In an ironically Machia- 
vellian tone, Aristotle explains what a tyrant must do to retain 
power. He must prevent the rise of any person of exceptional 
merit, by execution or assassination if necessary. He must prohibit 
common meals, clubs, and any education likely to produce hostile 
sentiment. There must be no literary assemblies or discussions. 
He must prevent people from knowing each other well, and 
compel them to live in public at his gates. He should employ 
spies, like the female detectives at Syracuse. He must sow quarrels, 
and impoverish his subjects. He should keep them occupied in 
great works, as the king of Egypt did in getting the pyramids 
built. He should give power to women and slaves, to make them 
informers. He should make war, in order that his subjects may 
have something to do and be always in want of a leader (131 3' 
and *). 

It is a melancholy reflection that this passage is, of the whole 
book, the one most appropriate to the present day. Aristotle 
concludes that there is no wickedness too great for a tyrant. There- 
is, however, he says, another method of preserving a tyranny, 
namely by moderation and by seeming religious. There is no 
decision as to which method is likely to prove the more successful. 

There is a long argument to prove that foreign conquest is not 
the end of the State, showing that many people took the imperialist 
view. There is, it is true, an exception: conquest of "natural 
slaves" is right and just. This would, in Aristotle's view, justify 
wars against barbarians, but not against Greeks, for no Greeks 
are '"natural slaves." In general, war is only a means, not an end; 
a city in an isolated situation, where conquest is not possible, 
may be happy; States that live in isolation need not be inactive. 
God and the universe are active, though foreign conquest is 
impossible for them. The happiness that a State should seek, 
therefore, though war may sometimes be a necessary means to it, 
should not be war, but the activities of peace. 

This leads to the question : how large should a State be ? Large 



ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

cities, we are told, are never well governed, because a great multi- 
tude cannot be orderly. A State ought to be large enough to be 
more or less self-sufficing, but not too large for constitutional 
government. It ought to be small enough for the citizens to know 
each other's characters, otherwise right will not be done in elections 
and law-suits. The territory should be small enough to be surveyed 
in its entirety from a hill-top. We are told both that it should be 
self-sufficient (1326*) and that it should have an export and 
import trade (1327*), which seems an inconsistency. 

Men who work for their living should not be admitted to citizen- 
ship. " Citizens should not lead the life of mechanics or tradesmen, 
for such a life is ignoble and inimical to virtue." Nor should they 
be husbandmen, because they need leisure. The citizens should 
own the property, but the husbandmen should be slaves of a 
different race (1330). Northern races, we are told, are spirited; 
southern races, intelligent ; therefore slaves should be of southern 
races, since it is inconvenient if they are spirited. The Greeks 
alone are both spirited and intelligent ; they are better governed 
than barbarians, and if united could rule the world (1327*). One 
might have expected at this point some allusion to Alexander, 
but there is none. 

With regard to the size of States, Aristotle makes, on a different 
scale, the same mistake that is made by many modern liberals. 
A State must be able to defend itself in war, and even, if any 
liberal culture is to survive, to defend itself without very great 
difficulty. I low large this requires a State to be, depends upon the 
technique of war and industry. In Aristotle's day, the City State 
was obsolete because it could not defend itself against Macedonia. 
In our day, Greece as a whole, including Macedonia, is obsolete 
in this sense, as has been recently proved. 1 To advocate complete 
independence for Greece, or any other small country, is now as 
futile as to advocate complete independence for a single city, 
whose territory can be seen entire from an eminence. There can 
be no true independence except for a State or alliance strong 
enough, by its own efforts, to repel all attempts at foreign conquest. 
Nothing smaller than America and the British Empire combined 
will satisfy this requirement; and perhaps even this would be 
too small a unit. 

The book, which, in the form in which we have it, appears to 
1 Thh was written in May, 194". 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

be unfinished, ends with a discussion of education. Education, 
of course, is only for children who are going to be citizens ; slaves 
may be taught useful arts, such as cooking, but these are no part 
of education. The citizen should be moulded to the form of 
government under which he lives, and there should therefore be 
differences according as the city in question is oligarchic or 
democratic. In the discussion, however, Aristotle assumes that 
the citizens will all have a share of political power. Children 
should learn what is useful to them, but not vulgarizing; for 
instance, they should not be taught any skill that deforms the 
body, or that would enable them to earn money. They should 
practise athletics in moderation, but not to the point of acquiring 
professional skill; the boys who train for the Olympic games 
suffer in health, as is shown by the fact that those who have been 
victors as boys are hardly ever victors as men. Children should 
learn drawing, in order to appreciate the beauty of the human 
form; and they should be taught to appreciate such painting and 
sculpture as expresses moral ideas. They may learn to sing and to 
play musical instruments enough to be able to enjoy music 
critically, but not enough to be skilled performers ; for no freeman 
would play or sing unless drunk. They must of course, learn to 
read and write, in spite of the usefulness of these arts. But the 
purpose of education is "virtue," not usefulness. What Aristotle 
means by "virtue" he has told us in the Ethics, to which this book 
frequently refers. 

Aristotle's fundamental assumptions, in his Politics, are very 
different from those of any modern writer. The aim of the State, 
in his view, is to produce cultured gentlemen men who combine 
the aristocratic mentality with love of learning and the arts 
This combination existed, in its highest perfection, in the Athens 
of Pericles, not in the population at large, but among the well- 
to-do. It began to break down in the last years of Pericles. The 
populace, who had no culture, turned against the friends of 
Pericles, who were driven to defend the privileges of the rich, 
by treachery, assassination, illegal despotism, and other such 
not very gentlemanly methods. After the death of Socrates, 
the bigotry of the Athenian democracy diminished, and Athens 
remained the centre of ancient culture, but political power went 
elsewhere. Throughout later antiquity, power and culture were 
usually separate: power was in the hands of rough soldiers, 

216 



ARISTOTLE'S POLITICS 

culture belonged to powerless Greeks, often slaves. This is only 
partially true of Rome in its great days, but it is emphatically 
true before Cicero and after Marcus Aurelius. After the barbarian 
invasion, the "gentlemen" were northern barbarians, the men 
of culture subtle southern ecclesiastics. This state of affairs 
continued, more or less, until the Renaissance, when the laity 
began to acquire culture. From the Renaissance onwards, the 
Creek conception of government by cultured gentlemen gradually 
prevailed more and more, reaching its acme in the eighteenth 
century. 

Various forces have put an end to this state of affairs. First, 
democracy, as embodied in the French Revolution and its after- 
math. The cultured gentlemen, as after the age of Pericles, had 
to defend their privileges against the populace, and in the process 
ceased to he either gentlemen or cultured. A second cause was 
the rise of industrialism, with a scientific technique very different 
from traditional culture. A third cause was popular education, 
which conferred the power to read and write, but did not confer 
culture; this enabled a new type of demagogue to practise a new 
type of propaganda, as seen in the dictatorships. 

Both for good and evil, therefore, the day of the cultured 
gentleman is past. 



-21" 



Chapter XXII 
ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 

ARISTOTLE'S influence, which was very great in many 
different fields, was greatest of all in logic. In late antiquity, 
when Plato was still supreme in metaphysics, Aristotle was 
the recognized authority in logic, and he retained this position 
throughout the Middle Ages. It was not till the thirteenth century 
that Christian philosophers accorded him supremacy in the field 
of metaphysics. This supremacy was largely lost after the Renais- 
sance, but his supremacy in logic survived. Even at the present 
day, all Catholic teachers of philosophy and many others still 
obstinately reject the discoveries of modern logic, and adhere 
with a strange tenacity to a system which is as definitely antiquated 
as Ptolemaic astronomy. This makes it difficult to do historical 
justice to Aristotle. His present-day influence is so inimical to 
clear thinking that it is hard to remember how great an advance 
he made upon all his predecessors (including Plato), or how 
admirable his logical work would still seem if it had been a stage 
in a continual progress, instead of being (as in fact it was) a dead 
end, followed by over two thousand years of stagnation. In dealing 
with the predecessors of Aristotle, it is not necessary to remind 
the reader that they are not verbally inspired; one can therefore 
praise them for their ability without being supposed to subscrilxr 
to all their doctrines. Aristotle, on the contrary, is still, especially 
in logic, a battle-ground, and cannot be treated in a purely his- 
torical spirit. 

Aristotle's most important work in logic is the doctrine of the 
syllogism. A syllogism is an argument consisting of three parts, a 
major premiss, a minor premiss, and a conclusion. Syllogisms 
are of a number of different kinds, each of which has a name, 
given by the scholastics. The most familiar ts the kind called 
"Barbara": 

All men are mortal (Major premiss). 
Socrates is a man (Minor premiss). 
Therefore: Socrates is mortal (Conclusion) 

21* 



ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 

Or: all men are mortal. 

AH Greeks are men. 

Therefore: All Greeks are mortal. 

(Aristotle docs not distinguish between these two forms; this, as 
we shall sec later, is a mistake.) 

Other forms are: No fishes are rational, oil sharks are fishes, 
therefore no sharks are rational. (This is called "Celarent.") 

All men are rational, some animals are men, therefore some 
animals are rational. (This is called "Darii.") 

No Greeks are black, some men are Greeks, therefore some men 
are not black. (This is called "Ferio.") x 

These four make up the "first figure"; Aristotle adds a second 
and third figure, and the schoolmen added a fourth. It is *hown 
that the three later figures can be reduced to the first by various 
devices. 

There are some inferences that can be made from a single 
premiss. From "some men are mortal" we can infer that "some 
mortals are men." According to Aristotle, this can be also inferred 
from "all men are mortal." From "no gods are mortal" we can 
infer "no mortals are gods," but from "some men are not Greeks" 
it does not follow that "some Greeks are not men." 

Apart from such inferences as the above, Aristotle and his 
followers thought that all deductive inference, when strictly 
stated, is syllogistic. By setting forth all the valid kinds of syllogism, 
and setting out any suggested argument in syllogistic form, it 
should therefore be possible to avoid all fallacies. 

This system was the beginning of formal logic, and, as such, was 
both important and admirable. But considered as the end, not the 
beginning, of formal logic, it is open to three kinds of criticism: 

(1) Formal defects within the system itself. 

(2) Over-estimation of the syllogism, as compared to other 
forms of deductive argument. 

(3) Over-estimation of deduction as a- form of argument. 
On each of these three, something must be said. 

(i) Formal defect*. Ix?t us begin with the two statements 
"Socrates is a man" and "all Greeks are men." It is necessary to 
make a sharp distinction between these two, which is not done 
in Aristotelian logic. The statement "all Greeks arc men" is 
commonly interpreted ss implying that there are Greeks: without 

219 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

this implication, some of Aristotle's syllogisms are not valid. 
Take for instance: 

"All Greeks are men, All Greeks are white, therefore some 
men are white." This is valid if there are Greeks, but not otherwise. 
If I were to say : 

"All golden mountains are mountains, all golden mountains 
are golden, therefore some mountains are golden," my conclusion 
would be false, though in some sense my premisses would be 
true. If we are to be explicit, we must therefore divide the one 
statement "all Greeks are men" into two, one saying "there are 
Greeks," and the other saying "if anything is a Greek it is a man." 
The latter statement is purely hypothetical, and does not imply 
that there are Greeks. 

The statement "all Greeks are men" is thus much more 
complex in form than the statement "Socrates is a man." 
"Socrates is a man" has "Socrates" for its subject, but "all 
Greeks are men" does not have "all Greeks" for its subject, 
for there is nothing about "all Greeks" either in the statement 
"there are Greeks," or in the statement "if anything is a Greek it 
is a man." 

This purely formal error was a source of errors in metaphysics 
and theory of knowledge. Consider the state of our knowledge in 
regard to the two propositions "Socrates is mortal" and "all men 
are mortal." In order to know the truth of "Socrates is mortal," 
most of us are content to rely upon testimony ; but if testimony 
is to be reliable, it must lead us back to some one who knew 
Socrates and saw him dead. The one perceived fact the dead 
body of Socrates together with the knowledge that this was 
called "Socrates," was enough to assure us of the mortality 
of Socrates. But when it comes to "all men are mortal," the 
matter is different. The question of our knowledge of such 
general propositions is a very difficult one. Sometimes they are 
merely verbal: "all Greeks are men" is known because nothing 
is called "a Greek" unless it is a man. Such general statements 
can be ascertained from the dictionary ; they tell us nothing about 
the world except how words are used. But "all men are mortal" 
is not of this sort; there is nothing logically self-contradictory 
about an immortal man. We believe the proposition on the basis 
of induction, because there is no well-authenticated case of a 
man living more than (say) 150 years; but this only makes the 

220 



ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 

proposition probable, not certain. It cannot be certain so long as 
living men exist. 

Metaphysical errors arose through supposing that "all men" is 
the subject of "all men are mortal" in the same sense as that in 
which "Socrates" is the subject of "Socrates is mortal." It made 
it possible to hold that, in some sense, "all men" denotes an entity 
of the same sort as that denoted by "Socrates." This led Aristotle 
to say that in a sense a species is a substance. He is careful to 
qualify this statement, but his followers, especially Porphyry, 
showed less caution. 

Another error into which Aristotle falls through this mistake 
is to think that a predicate of a predicate can be a predicate of 
the original subject. If I say "Socrates is Greek, all Greeks are 
human," Aristotle thinks that "human" is a predicate of "Greek," 
while "Greek" is a predicate of "Socrates," and obviously "human" 
is a predicate of "Socrates." But in fact "human" is not a predicate 
of "Greek." The distinction between names and predicates, or 
in metaphysical language, between particulars and universals, 
is thus blurred, with disastrous consequences to philosophy. One 
of the resulting confusions was to suppose that a class with only 
one member is identical with that one member. This made it 
impossible to have a correct theory of the number one, and led 
to endless bad metaphysics about unity. 

(2) Over-estimation of tlie syllogism. The syllogism is only one 
kind of deductive argument. In mathematics, which is wholly 
deductive, syllogisms hardly ever occur. Of course, it would be 
possible to re-write mathematical arguments in syllogistic form, 
but this would he very artificial and would not make them any 
more cogent. Take arithmetic, for example. If I buy goods worth 
1 6s. 3d., and tender a 1 note in payment, how much change 
is due to me ? To put this simple sum in the form of a syllogism 
would be absurd, and would tend to conceal the real nature of 
the argument. Again, within logic there are non-syllogistic 
inferences such as: "A horse is an animal, therefore a horse's 
head is an animal's head." Valid syllogisms, in fact, are only 
some among valid deductions, and have no logical priority over 
others. The attempt to give pre-eminence to the syllogism in 
deduction misled philosophers as to the nature of mathematical 
reasoning. Kant, who perceived that mathematics is not syllogistic, 
inferred that it uses extra-logical principles, which, however, he 

221 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

supposed to be as certain as those of logic. He, like his predecessors, 
though in a different way, was misled by respect for Aristotle. 

(3) Over -estimation of deduction. The Greeks in general attached 
more importance to deduction as a source of knowledge than 
modern philosophers do. In this respect, Aristotle was less at 
fault than Plato ; he repeatedly admitted the importance of induc- 
tion, and he devoted considerable attention to the question : how 
do we know the first premisses from which deduction must start ? 
Nevertheless, he, like other Greeks, gave undue prominence to 
deduction in his theory of knowledge. We shall agree that Mr. 
Smith (say) is mortal, and we may, loosely, say that we know this 
because we know that all men are mortal. But what we really 
know is not "all men are mortal"; we know mther something 
like "all men born more than one hundred and fifty years ago are 
mortal, and so are almost all men born more than one hundred 
years ago." This is our reason for thinking that Mr. Smith will 
die. But this argument is an induction, not a deduction. It has 
less cogency than a deduction, and yields only a probability, not 
a certainty; but on the other hand it gives new knowledge, which 
deduction does not. All the important inferences outside logic and 
pure mathematics are inductive, not deductive; the only excep- 
tions are law and theology, each of which derives its first prin- 
ciples from an unquestionable text, viz. the statute hooks 01 the 
scriptures. 

Apart from The Prior Analytics, which deals with the syllogism 
there are other logical writings of Aristotle which have con- 
siderable importance in the history of philosophy. One of these 
is the short work on The Categories. Porphyry the Neoplatonist 
wrote a commentary on this book, which had a very notable 
influence on medieval philosophy; but for the present let us 
ignore Porphyry and confine ourselves to Aristotle. 

What, exactly, is meant by the word "category/* whether in 
Aristotle or in Kant and Hegel, I must confess that I have never 
been able to understand. I do not myself believe that the term 
"category" is in any way useful in philosophy, as representing 
any clear idea. There are, in Aristotle, ten categories: substance, 
quantity, quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, 
and affection. The only definition offered of the term "category " 
is: "expressions which are in no way composite signify" and 
then follows the above list. This seems to mean that every word 

222 



ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 

of which the meaning is not compounded of the meanings of 
other words signifies a substance or a quantity or etc. There is 
no suggestion of any principle on which the list of ten categories 
has been compiled. 

"Substance" is primarily what is not predicable of a subject nor 
present in a subject. A thing is said to be "present in a subject" 
when, though not a part of the subject, it cannot exist without 
the subject. The instances given are a piece of grammatical 
knowledge which is present in a mind, and a certain whiteness 
which may be present in a body. A substance in the above primary 
sense is an individual thing or person or animal. But in a secondary 
sense a species or a genus e.g. "man" or "animal" may be 
called a substance. This secondary sense seems indefensible, 
and opened the door, in later writers, to much bad metaphysics. 

The Posterior Analytics is a work largely concerned with a 
question which must trouble any deductive theory, namely: How 
are first premisses obtained? Since deduction must start from 
somewhere, we must begin with something unproved, which 
must be known otherwise than by demonstration. I shall not give 
Aristotle's theory in detail, since it depends upon the notion of 
essence. A definition, he says, is a statement of a thing's essential 
nature. The notion of essence is an intimate part of every philo- 
sophy subsequent to Aristotle, until we come to modern times. 
It is, in my opinion, a hopelessly muddle-headed notion, but its 
historical importance requires us to say something about it. 

The "essence" of a thing appears to have meant "those of its 
properties which it cannot change without losing its identity." 
Socrates may be sometimes happy, sometimes sad; sometimes 
well, sometimes ill. Since he can change these properties without 
ceasing to be Socrates, they are no part of his essence. But it is 
supposed to be of the essence of Socrates that he is a man, though 
a Pythagorean, who believes in transmigration, will not admit 
this. In fact, the question of "essence" is one as to the use of 
words. We apply the same name, on different occasions, to 
somewhat different occurrences, which .we regard as manifesta- 
tions of a single "thing" or "person." In fact, however, this is 
only a verbal convenience. The "essence" of Socrates thus consists 
of those properties in the absence of which we should not use the 
name "Socrates." The question is purely linguistic: a word may 
have an essence, but a thing cannot. 

223 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The conception of "substance," like that of "essence, 11 is a 
transference to metaphysics of what is only a linguistic convenience. 
We find it convenient, in describing the world, to describe a 
certain number of occurrences as events in the life of "Socrates," 
and a certain number of others as events in the life of "Mr. Smith." 
This leads us to think of "Socrates" or "Mr. Smith" as denoting 
something that persists through a certain number of years, and 
as in some way more "solid" and "real" than the events that 
happen to him. If Socrates is ill, we think that Socrates, at other 
times, is well, and therefore the being of Socrates is independent 
of his illness; illness, on the other hand, requires somebody to 
be ill. But although Socrates need not be ill, something must be 
occurring to him if he is to be considered to exist. He is not, 
therefore, really any more "solid" than the things that happen 
to him. 

"Substance," when taken seriously, is a concept impossible to 
free from difficulties. A substance is supposed to be the subject 
of properties, and to be something distinct from all its properties. 
But when we take away the properties, and try to imagine the 
substance by itself, we find that there is nothing left. To put the 
matter in another way: What distinguishes one substance from 
another? Not difference of properties, for, according to the logic 
of substance, difference of properties presupposes numerical 
diversity between the substances concerned. Two substances, 
therefore, must be just two, without being, in themselves, in any 
way distinguishable. How, then, are we ever to find out that 
they are two ? 

"Substance," in fact, is merely a convenient way of collecting 
events into bundles. What can we know about Mr. Smith? When 
we look at him, we see a pattern of colours ; when we listen to him 
talking, we hear a series of sounds. We believe that, like us, he has 
thoughts and feelings. But what is Mr. Smith apart from all these 
occurrences? A mere imaginary hook, from which the occurrences 
are supposed to hang. They have in fact no need of a hook, any 
more than the earth needs an elephant to rest upon. Any one 
can see, in the analogous case of a geographical region, that such 
a word as "France" (say) is only a linguistic convenience, and that 
there is not a thing called "France" over and above its various 
parts. The same holds of "Mr. Smith"; it is a collective name 
for a number of occurrences. If we take it as anything more, it 

224 



ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 

denotes something completely unknowable, and therefore not 
needed for the expression of what we know. 

"Substance," in a word, is a metaphysical mistake, due to 
transference to the world-structure of the structure of sentences 
composed of a subject and a predicate. 

I conclude that the Aristotelian doctrines with which we have 
been concerned in this chapter are wholly false, with the exception 
of the formal theory of the syllogism, which is unimportant. 
Any person in the present day who wishes to learn logic will be 
wasting his time if he reads Aristotle or any of his disciples. 
None the less, Aristotle's logical writings show great ability, and 
would have been useful to mankind if they had appeared at a 
time when intellectual originality was still active. Unfortunately, 
they appeared at the very end of the creative period of Greek 
thought, and therefore came to be accepted as authoritative. 
By the time that logical originality revived, a reign of two thousand 
years had made Aristotle very difficult to dethrone. Throughout 
modern times, practically every advance in science, in logic, or 
in philosophy has had to be made in the teeth of opposition from 
Aristotle's disciples. 



H 



Chapter XXIII 
ARISTOTLE'S PHYSICS 

IN tiiis chapter I propose to consider two of Aristotle's books, 
the one called Physics and the one called On the Heavens. 
These two books are closely connected; the second takes up 
the argument at the point at which the first has left it. Both were 
extremely influential, and dominated science until the time of 
Galileo. Words such as "quintessence" and "sublunary" are 
derived from the theories expressed in these books. The historian 
of philosophy, accordingly, must study them, in spite of the fact 
that hardly a sentence in either can be accepted in the light of 
modern science. 

To understand the views of Aristotle, as of most Greeks, on 
physics, it is necessary to apprehend their imaginative back- 
ground. Every philosopher, in addition to the formal system which 
he offers to the world, has another, much simpler, of which he 
may be quite unaware. If he is aware of it, he probably realizes 
that it won't quite do; he therefore conceals it, and sets forth 
something more sophisticated, which he believes because it is 
like his crude system, but which he asks others to accept because 
he thinks he has made it such as cannot be disproved. The 
sophistication comes in by way of refutation of refutations, but 
this alone will never give a positive result: it shows, at best, 
that a theory may be true, not that it must be. The positive result, 
however little the philosopher may realize it, is due to his imagina- 
tive preconceptions, or to what Santayana calls "animal faith." 

In relation to physics, Aristotle's imaginative background was 
very different from that of a modern student. Nowadays, a boy 
begins with mechanics, which, by its very name, suggests machines. 
He is accustomed to motor-cars and aeroplanes; he docs not, 
even in the dimmest recesses of his subconscious imagination, 
think that a motor-car contains some sort of horse in its inside, 
or that an aeroplane flies because its wings are those of a bird 
possessing magical powers. Animals have lost their importance 
in our imaginative pictures of the world, in which man stands 
comparatively alone as master of a mainly lifeless and largely 
subservient material environment. 

226 



ARISTOTLE'S PHYSICS 

To the Greek, attempting to give a scientific account of motion, 
the purely mechanical view hardly suggested itself, except in the 
case of a few men of genius such as Democritus and Archimedes. 
Two sets of phenomena seemed important: the movements of 
animals, and the movements of the heavenly bodies. To the 
modern man of science, the body of an animal is a very elaborate 
machine, with an enormously complex physico-chemical structure; 
every new discovery consists in diminishing the apparent gulf 
between animals and machines. To the Greek, it seemed more 
natural to assimilate apparently lifeless motions to those of animals. 
A child still distinguishes live animals from other things by the 
fact that they can move of themselves; to many Greeks, and 
especially to Aristotle, this peculiarity suggested itself as the basis 
of a general theory of physics. 

But how about the heavenly bodies? They differ from animals 
by the regularity of their movements, but this may be only due 
to their superior perfection. Every Greek philosopher, whatever 
he may have come to think in adult life, had been taught in child- 
hood to regard the sun and moon as gods; Anaxagoras was 
prosecuted for impiety because he thought that they were not 
alive. It was natural that a philosopher who could no longer 
regard the heavenly bodies themselves as divine should think of 
them as moved by the will of a Divine Being who had a Hellenic 
love of order and geometrical simplicity. Thus the ultimate 
source of all movement is Will: on earth the capricious Will of 
human beings and animals, but in heaven the unchanging Will 
of the Supreme Artificer. 

I do not suggest that this applies to every detail of what Aristotle 
has to say. What I do suggest is that it gives his imaginative back- 
ground, and represents the sort of thing which, in embarking on 
liis investigations, he would expect to find true. 

After these preliminaries, let us examine what it is that he 
actually says. 

Physics, in Aristotle, is the science of what the Greeks called 
"phusis" (or M physis") t a word which is translated 'nature," 
but has not exactly the meaning which we attach to that word. 
We still speak of "natural science" and "natural history," but 
"nature" by itself, though it is a very ambiguous word, seldom 
means just what "phusis" meant. "Phusis" had to do with growth ; 
one might sav it is the "nature" of an acorn to grow into an oak, 

227 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and in that case one would be using the word in the Aristotelian 
sense. The "nature" of .a thing, Aristotle says, is its end, that for 
the sake of which it exists. Thus the word has a ideological 
implication. Some things exist by nature, some from other causes. 
Animals, plants, and simple bodies (elements) exist by nature; 
they have an internal principle of motion (the word translated 
"motion" or "movement" has a wider meaning than "loco- 
motion" ; in addition to locomotion it includes change of quality 
or of size.) Nature is a source of being moved or at rest. Things 
"have a nature" if they have an internal principle of this kind. 
The phrase "according to nature" applies to these things and their 
essential attributes. (It was through this point of view that 
"unnatural" came to express blame.) Nature is in form rather 
than in matter; what is potentially flesh or bone has not 
yet acquired its own nature, and a thing is more what it is 
when it has attained to fulfilment. This whole point of view 
seems to be suggested by biology: the acorn is "potentially" 
an oak. 

Nature belongs to the class of causes which operate for the sake 
of something. This leads to a discussion of the view that nature 
works of necessity, without purpose, in connection with which 
Aristotle discusses the survival of the fittest, in the form taught 
by Empedocles. This cannot be right, he says, because things 
happen in fixed ways, and when a series has a completion, all 
preceding steps are for its sake. Those things are "natural" which 
"by a continuous movement, originated from an internal principle, 
arrive at some completion" (199*). 

This whole conception of "nature," though it might well seem 
admirably suited to explain the growth of animals and plants, 
became, in the event, a great obstacle to the progress of science, 
and a source of much that was bad in ethics. In the latter respect, 
it is still harmful. 

Motion, we are told, is the fulfilling of what exists potentially. 
This view, apart from other defects, is incompatible with the 
relativity of locomotion. When A moves relatively to B, B moves 
relatively to A, and there is no sense in saying that one of the two 
is in motion while the other is at rest. When a dog seizes a bone, 
it seems to common sense that the dog moves while the bone 
remains at rest (until seized), and that the motion has a purpose, 
namely to fulfil the dog's "nature." But it has turned out that this 

228 



ARISTOTLE'S PHYSICS 

point of view cannot be applied to dead matter, and that, for the 
purposes of scientific physics, no conception of an "end" is useful, 
nor can any motion, in scientific strictness, be treated as other 
than relative. 

Aristotle rejects the void, as maintained by Leucippus and 
Democritus. He then passes on to a rather curious discussion of 
time. It might, he says, be maintained that time does not exist, 
since it is composed of past and future, of which one no longer 
exists while the other does not yet exist. This view, however, he 
rejects. Time, he says, is motion that admits of numeration. (It is 
not clear why he thinks numeration essential.) We may fairly ask, 
he continues, whether time could exist without the soul, since there 
cannot be anything to count unless there is someone to count, 
and time involves numeration. It seems that he thinks of time as 
so many hours or days or years. Some things, he adds, are eternal, 
in the sense of not being in time ; presumably he is thinking of 
such things as numbers. 

There always has been motion, and there always will be; for 
there cannot be time without motion, and all are agreed that time 
is uncreated, except Plato. On this point, Christian followers of 
Aristotle were obliged to dissent from him, since the Bible tells 
us that the universe had a beginning. 

The Physics ends with the argument for an unmoved mover, 
which we considered in connection with the Metaphysics. There 
is one unmoved mover, which directly causes a circular motion. 
Circular motion is the primary kind, and the only kind which 
can be continuous and infinite. The first mover has no parts or 
magnitude and is at the circumference of the world. 

Having reached this conclusion, we pass on to the heavens. 

The treatise On tlit Heavens sets forth a pleasant and simple 
theory. Things below the moon are subject to generation and 
decay; from the moon upwards, everything is ungenerated and 
indestnictible.The earth, which is spherical, is at the centre of the 
universe. In the sublunary sphere, everything is composed of the 
four elements, earth, water, air, and fire; but there is a fifth ele- 
ment, of which the heavenly bodies are composed. The natural 
movement of the terrestrial elements is rectilinear, but that of the 
fifth clement is circular. The heavens are perfectly spherical, and 
the upper regions are more divine than the lower. The stars and 
planets are not composed of fire, hut of the fifth element; their 

229 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

motion is due to that of spheres to which they are attached. 
(All this appears in poetical form in Dante's Paradiso.) 

The four terrestrial elements are not eternal, but are generated 
out of each other fire is absolutely light, in the sense that its 
natural motion is upward ; earth is absolutely heavy. Air is relatively 
light, and water is relatively heavy. 

This theory provided many difficulties for later ages. Comets, 
which were recognized as destructible, had to be assigned to the 
sublunary sphere, but in the seventeenth century it was found 
that they describe orbits round the sun, and are very seldom as 
near as the moon. Since the natural motion of terrestrial bodies 
is rectilinear, it was held that a projectile fired horizontally will 
move horizontally for a time, and then suddenly begin to fall 
vertically. Galileo's discovery that a projectile moves in a parabola 
shocked his Aristotelian colleagues. Copernicus, Kepler, and 
Galileo had to combat Aristotle as well as the Bible in establishing 
the view that the earth is not the centre of the universe, but rotates 
once a day and goes round the sun once a year. 

To come to a more general matter: Aristotelian physics is in- 
compatible with Newton's "First Law of Motion," originally 
enunciated by Galileo. This law states that every body, left to 
itself, mil, if already in motion, continue to move in a straight 
line with uniform velocity. Thus outside causes are required, not 
to account for motion, but to account for change of motion, either 
in velocity or in direction. Circular motion, which Aristotle 
thought "natural" for the heavenly bodies, involves a continual 
change in the direction of motion, and therefore requires a force 
directed towards the centre of the circle, as in Newton's law of 
gravitation. 

Finally: The view that the heavenly bodies are eternal and in- 
corruptible has had to be abandoned. The sun and stars have long 
lives, but do not live for ever. They are born from a nebula, and 
in the end they either explode or die of cold. Nothing in the visible 
world is exempt from change and decay; the Aristotelian belief 
to the contrary, though accepted by medieval Christians, is a 
product of the pagan worship of sun and moon and planets. 



230 



Chapter XXIV 
EARLY GREEK MATHEMATICS AND ASTRONOMY 

I AM concerned in this chapter with mathematics, not on its 
own account, but as it was related to Greek philosophy a 
relation which, especially in Plato, was very close. The pre- 
eminence of the Greeks appears more clearly in mathematics and 
astronomy than in anything else. What they did in art, in literature, 
and in philosophy, may be judged better or worse according to 
taste, but what they accomplished in geometry is wholly beyond 
question. They derived something from Egypt, and rather less 
from Babylonia; but what they obtained from these sources was, 
in mathematics, mainly simple rules, and in astronomy records 
of observations extended over very long periods. The art of 
mathematical demonstration was, almost wholly, Greek in origin. 
There are many pleasant stories, probably unhistorical, showing 
what practical problems stimulated mathematical investigations. 
The earliest and simplest relates to Thales, who, when in Egypt, 
was asked by the king to find out the height of a pyramid. He 
waited for the time of day when his shadow was as long as he was 
tall ; he then measured the shadow of the pyramid, which was of 
course equal to its height. It is said that the laws of perspective 
were first studied by the geometer Agatharcus, in order to paint 
scenery for the plays of Aeschylus. The problem of finding the 
distance of a ship at sea, which was said to have been studied by 
Thales, was correctly solved at an early stage. One of the great 
problems that occupied Greek geometers, that of the duplication 
of the cube, originated, we are told, with the priests of a certain 
temple, who were informed by the oracle that the god wanted a 
statue twice as large as the one they had. At first they thought 
simply of doubling all the dimensions of the statue, but then they 
realized that the result would be eight times as large as the ori- 
ginal, which would involve more expense than the god had 
demanded. So they sent a deputation to Plato to ask whether any- 
body in the Academy could solve their problem. The geometers 
took it up, and worked at it for centuries, producing, incidentally, 
much admirable work. The problem is, of course, that of deter- 
mining the cube root of a. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The square root of 2, which was the first irrational to be dis- 
covered, was known to the early Pythagoreans, and ingenious 
methods of approximating to its value were discovered. The best 
was as follows: Form two columns of numbers, which we will 
call the <z's and the 6's; each starts with i. The next a, at each 
stage, is formed by adding the last a and b already obtained ; the 
next b is formed by adding twice the previous a to the previous b. 
The first 6 pairs so obtained are (i ,i), (2, 3), (5, 7), (12, 17), (29, 41), 

(70, 99). In each pair, 20* - 6 a is i or i. Thus - is nearly the 

square root of two, and at each fresh step it gets nearer. For 
instance, the reader may satisfy himself that the square of 99/70 
is very nearly equal to 2. 

Pythagoras always a rather misty figure is described by 
Proclus as the first who made geometry a liberal education. Many 
authorities, including Sir Thomas Heath, 1 believe that he probably 
discovered the theorem that bears his name, to the effect that, in 
a right-angled triangle, the square on the side opposite the right 
angle is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides. 
In any case, this theorem was known to the Pythagoreans at a 
very early date. They knew also that the sum of the angles of a 
triangle is two right angles. 

Irrationals other than the square root of two were studied, in 
particular cases, by Theodorus, a contemporary of Socrates, and 
in a more general way by Theaetetus, who was roughly contem- 
porary with Plato, but somewhat older. Democritus wrote a 
treatise on irrationals, but very little is known as to its contents. 
Plato was profoundly interested in the subject; he mentions the 
work of Thcodorus and Theaetetus in the dialogue called after 
the latter. In the Laws (819-820), he says that the general ignorance 
on this subject is disgraceful, and implies .that he himself began 
to know about it rather late in life. It had of course an important 
bearing on the Pythagorean philosophy. 

One of the most important consequences of the discovery of 
irrationals was the invention of the geometrical theory of propor- 
tion by Eudoxus (ca. 408 ca. 355 B.C.). Before him, there was 
only the arithmetical theory of proportion. According to this 
theory*, the ratio of a to b is equal to the ratio of c to d if a times d 

' (jreek Mathtmatia, Vol. I, p. 145 

23* 



FARI'Y GREEK MATHEMATICS AND ASTRONOMY 

is equal to b times c. This definition, in the absence of an arith- 
metical theory of irrationals, is only applicable to rationals. 
Eudoxus, however, gave a new definition not subject to this 
restriction, framed in a manner which suggests the methods of 
modern analysis. The theory is developed in Euclid, and has 
great logical beauty. 

Eudoxus also either invented or perfected the "method of ex- 
haustion," which was subsequently used with great success by 
Archimedes. This method is an anticipation of the integral cal- 
culus. Take, for example, the question of the area of a circle. You 
can inscribe in a circle a regular hexagon, or a regular dodecagon, 
or a regular polygon of a thousand or a million sides. The area 
of such a polygon, however many sides it has, is proportional to 
the square on the diameter of the circle. The more sides the 
polygon has, the more nearly it becomes equal to the circle. You 
can prove that, if you give the polygon enough sides, its area can 
be got to differ from that of the circle by less than any previously 
assigned area, however small. For this purpose, the "axiom of 
Archimedes" is used. This states (when somewhat simplified) 
that if the greater of two quantities is halved, and then the half 
is halved, and so on, a quantity will be reached, at last, which is 
less than the smaller of the original two quantities. In other words, 
if a is greater than A, there is some whole number n such that 2 n 
times b is greater than a. 

The method of exhaustion sometimes leads to an exact result, 
as in squaring the parabola, which was done by Archimedes ; some- 
times, as in the attempt to square the circle, it can only lead to 
successive approximations. The problem of squaring the circle is 
the problem of determining the ratio of the circumference of a 
circle to the diameter, which is called 77. Archimedes used the 
approximation *f in calculations ; by inscribing and circumscribing 
a regular polygon of 96 sides, he proved that TT is less than 3^ and 
greater than 3^ J. The method could be carried to any required 
degree of approximation, and that is all that any method can do 
in this problem. The use of inscribed and circumscribed polygons 
for approximations to n goes back to Antiphon, who was a 
contemporary of Socrates. 

Euclid, who was still, when I was young, the sole acknowledged 
text-book of geometry for boys, lived at Alexandria, about 300 B.C., 
a few years after the death of Alexander and Aristotle. Most of 

233 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

his Elements was not original, but the order of propositions, and 
the logical structure, were largely his. The more one studies geo- 
metry, the more admirable these are seen to be. The treatment of 
parallels by means of the famous postulate of parallels has the 
twofold merit of rigour in deduction and of not concealing the 
dubiousness of the initial assumption. The theory of proportion, 
which follows Eudoxus, avoids all the difficulties connected with 
irrationals, by methods essentially similar to those introduced by 
Weierstrass into nineteenth-century analysis. Euclid then passes 
on to a kind of geometrical algebra, and deals, in Book X, with the 
subject of irrationals. After this he proceeds to solid geometry, 
ending with the construction of the regular solids, which had 
been perfected by Theaetetus and assumed in Plato's Timaeus. 

Euclid's Elements is certainly one of the greatest books ever 
written, and one of the most perfect monuments of the Greek 
intellect. It has, of course, the typical Greek limitations: the 
method is purely deductive, and there is no way, within it, of 
testing the initial assumptions. These assumptions were supposed 
to be unquestionable, but in the nineteenth century non-Euclidean 
geometry showed that they might be in part mistaken, and that 
only observation could decide whether they were so. 

There is in Euclid the contempt for practical utility which had 
been inculcated by Plato. It is said that a pupil, after listening to 
a demonstration, asked what he would gain by learning geometry, 
whereupon Euclid called a slave and said "Give the young man 
threepence, since he must needs make a gain out of what he 
learns." The contempt for practice was, however, pragmatically 
justified. No one, in Greek times, supposed that conic sections 
had any utility; at last, in the seventeenth century, Galileo dis- 
covered that projectiles move in parabolas, and Kepler discovered 
that planets move in ellipses. Suddenly the work that the Greeks 
had done from pure love of theory became the key to warfare and 
astronomy. 

The Romans were too practical-minded to appreciate Euclid; 
the first of them to mention him is Cicero, in whose time there was 
probably no Latin translation ; indeed there is no record of any 
Latin translation before Boethius (ca. A.D. 480). The Arabs were 
more appreciative : a copy was given to the caliph by the Byzantine 
emperor about A.D. 760, and a translation into Arabic was made 
under Harun al Rashid, about A.D. 800. The first still extant 

234 



EARLY GREEK MATHEMATICS AND ASTRONOMY 

Latin translation was made from the Arabic by Adelard of 
Bath in A.D. 1120. From that time on, the study of geometry 
gradually revived in the West; but it was not until the late Re- 
naissance that important advances were made. 

I come now to astronomy, where Greek achievements were as 
remarkable as in geometry. Before their time, among the Baby- 
lonians and Egyptians, many centuries of observation had laid a 
foundation. The apparent motions of the planets had been re- 
corded, but it was not known that the morning and evening star 
were the same. A cycle of eclipses had been discovered, certainly 
in Babylonia and probably in Egypt, which made the prediction 
of lunar eclipses fairly reliable, but not of solar eclipses, since 
those were not always visible at a given spot. We owe to the 
Babylonians the division of the right angle into ninety degrees, 
and of the degree into sixty minutes; they had a liking for the 
number sixty, and even a system of numeration based upon it. 
The Greeks were fond of attributing the wisdom of their pioneers 
to travels in Egypt, but what had really been achieved before the 
Greeks was very little. The prediction of an eclipse by Thales 
was, however, an example of foreign influence; there is no reason 
to suppose that he added anything to what he learnt from Egyptian 
or Babylonian sources, and it was a stroke of luck that his prediction 
was verified. 

Let us begin with some of the earliest discoveries and correct 
hypotheses. Ariaximander thought that the earth floats freely, and 
is not supported on anything. Aristotle, 1 who often rejected the 
hcst hypotheses of his time, objected to the theory of Anaxi- 
inander, that the earth, being at the centre, remained immovable 
because there was no reason for moving in one direction rather 
than another. If this were valid, he said, a man placed at the 
centre of a circle with food at various points of the circumference 
would starve to death for lack of reason to choose one portion of 
food rather than another. This argument reappears in scholastic 
philosophy, not in connection with astronomy, but with free will. 
It reappears in the form of "Buridan's ass," which was unable to 
choose between two bundles of hay placed at equal distances to 
right and left, and therefore died of hunger. 

Pythagoras, in all probability, was the first to think the earth 
spherical, but his reasons were (one must suppose) aesthetic 

1 De Cacto, 295*- 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

rather than scientific. Scientific reasons, however, were soon found. 
Anaxagoras discovered that the moon shines by reflected light, 
and gave the right theory of eclipses. He himself still thought the 
earth flat, but the shape of the earth's shadow in lunar eclipses 
gave the Pythagoreans conclusive arguments in favour of its being 
spherical. They went further, and regarded the earth as one of the 
planets. They knew from Pythagoras himself, it is said that 
the morning star and the evening star are identical, and they 
thought that ail the planets, including the earth, move in circles, 
not round the sun, but round the "central fire." They had dis- 
covered that the moon always turns the same face to the earth, 
and they thought that the earth always turns the same face to the 
"central fire." The Mediterranean regions were on the side turned 
away from the central fire, which was therefore always invisible. 
The central fire was called "the house of Zeus," or "the Mother 
of the gods." The sun was supposed to shine by light reflected 
from the central fire. In addition to the earth, there was another 
body, the counter-earth, at the same distance from the central 
fire. For this, they had two reasons, one scientific, one derived 
from their arithmetical mysticism. The scientific reason was the 
correct observation that an eclipse of the moon sometimes occurs 
when both sun and moon are above the horizon. Refraction, 
which is the cause of this phenomenon, was unknown to them, 
and they thought that, in such cases, the eclipse must be due to 
the shadow of a body other than the earth. The other reason was 
that the sun and moon, the five planets, the earth and counter- 
earth, and the central fire, made ten heavenly bodies, and ten was 
the mystic number of the Pythagoreans. 

This Pythagorean theory is attributed to Philolatis, a Theban, 
who lived at the end of the fifth century B.C. Although it is fanciful 
and in part quite unscientific, it is very important, since it involves 
the greater part of the imaginative effort required for conceiving 
the Copernican hypothesis. To conceive of the earth, not as the 
centre of the universe, but as one among the planets, not as 
eternally fixed, but as wandering through space, showed an extra- 
ordinary emancipation from anthropoctntric thinking. When once 
this jolt had been given to men's natural picture of the universe, 
it was not so very difficult to be led by scientific arguments to a 
more accurate theory. 
To this various observations contributed. Oenopidcs, who was 



EARLY GREEK MATHEMATICS AND ASTRONOMY 

slightly later than Anaxagoras, discovered the obliquity of the 
ecliptic. It soon became clear that the sun must be much larger 
than the earth, which fact supported those who denied that the 
earth is the centre of the universe. The central fire and the counter- 
earth were dropped by the Pythagoreans soon after the time of 
Plato. Heraclides of Pontus (whose dates are about 388 to 315 B.C., 
contemporary with Aristotle) discovered that Venus and Mercury 
revolve about the sun, and adopted the view that the earth rotates 
on its own axis once every twenty-four hours. This last was a 
very important step, which no predecessor had taken. Heraclides 
was of Plato's school, and must have been a great man, but was 
not as much respected as one would expect ; he is described as a 
fat dandy. 

Aristarchus of Samos, who lived approximately from 310 to 
230 B.C., and was thus about twenty-five years older than Archi- 
medes, is the most interesting of all ancient astronomers, because 
he advanced the complete Copernican hypothesis, that all the 
planets, including the earth, revolve in circles round the sun, and 
that the earth rotates on its axis once in twenty-four hours. It is 
a little disappointing to find that the only extant work of Aristar- 
chus, On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and the Moon, adheres 
to the geocentric view. It is true that, for the problems with which 
this book deals, it makes no difference which theory is adopted, 
and he may therefore have thought it unwise to burden his cal- 
culations with an unnecessary opposition to the general opinion 
of astronomers ; or he may have only arrived at the Copernican 
hypothesis after writing this book. Sir Thomas Heath, in his 
work on Aristarchus, 1 which contains the text of this book with 
a translation, inclines to the latter view. The evidence that 
Aristarchus suggested the Copernican view is, in any case, quite 
conclusive. 

The first and best evidence is that of Archimedes, who, as we 
have seen, was a younger contemporary of Aristarchus. Writing 
to Gelon, King of Syracuse, he says that Aristarchus brought out 
"a book consisting of certain hypotheses," and continues: "His 
hypotheses are that the fixed stars and the sun remain unmoved, 
that the earth revolves about the sun in the circumference of a 
circle, the sun lying in the middle of the orbit." There is a 

1 Aristurchut of Samos, the Ancient Copernicus. By Sir Thomas Heath. 
Oxford, 1913. What follows is bused on this book. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

passage in Plutarch saying that Cleanthes "thought it was the 
duty of the Greeks to indict Aristarchus of Samos on the charge 
of impiety for putting in motion the Hearth of the Universe (i.e. 
the earth), this being the effect of his attempt to save the pheno- 
mena by supposing the heaven to remain at rest and the earth to 
revolve in an oblique circle, while it rotates, at the same time, 
about its own axis." Cleanthes was a contemporary of Aristarchus, 
and died about 232 B.C. In another passage, Plutarch says that 
Aristarchus advanced this view only as a hypothesis, but that 
his successor Seleucus maintained it as a definite opinion. (Seleucus 
flourished about 250 B.C.). Aetius and Sextus Empiricus also assert 
that Aristarchus advanced the heliocentric hypothesis, but do not 
say that it was set forth by him only as a hypothesis. Even if he 
did so, it seems not unlikely that he, like Galileo two thousand 
years later, was influenced by the fear of offending religious pre- 
judices, a fear which the attitude of Cleanthes (mentioned above) 
shows to have been well grounded. 

The Copernican hypothesis, after being advanced, whether posi- 
tively or tentatively, by Aristarchus, was definitely adopted by 
Seleucus, but by no other ancient astronomer. This general 
rejection was mainly due to Hip parch us, who flourished from 161 
to 126 B.C. He is described by Heath as "the greatest astronomer 
of antiquity." 1 He was the first to write systematically on trigono- 
metry ; he discovered the precession of the equinoxes ; he estimated 
the length of the lunar month with an error of less than one 
second; he improved Aristarchus's estimates of the sizes and 
distances of the sun and moon; he made a catalogue of eight 
hundred and fifty fixed stars, giving their latitude and longitude. 
As against the heliocentric hypothesis of Aristarchus, he adopted 
and improved the theory of epicycles which had been invented by 
Apollonius, who flourished about 220 B.C. ; it was a development 
of this theory that came to be known, later, as the Ptolemaic 
system, after the astronomer Ptolemy, who flourished in the middle 
of the second century A.D. 

Copernicus perhaps came to know something, though not 
much, of the almost forgotten hypothesis of Aristarchus, and was 
encouraged by finding ancient authority for his innovation. Other- 
wise, the effect of this hypothesis on subsequent astronomy was 
practically nil. 

1 Greek Mathematics, Vol. II, p. 253. 



EARLY GREEK MATHEMATICS AND ASTRONOMY 

Ancient astronomers, in estimating the sizes of the earth, moon, 
and sun, and the distances of the moon and sun, used methods 
which were theoretically valid, but they were hampered by the 
lack of instruments of precision. Many of their results, in view 
of this lack, were surprisingly good. Eratosthenes estimated the 
earth's diameter at 7,850 miles, which is only about fifty miles 
short of the truth. Ptolemy estimated the mean distance of the 
moon at 29 J times the earth's diameter; the correct figure is 
about 30.2. None of them got anywhere near the size and distance 
of the sun, which all under-estimated. Their estimates, in terms 
of the earth's diameter, were: 

Aristarchus, 180; 

Hipparchus, 1,245; 

Posidonius, 6,545. 

The correct figure is 1 1 ,726. It will be seen that these estimates 
continually improved (that of Ptolemy, however, showed a retro- 
gression) ; that of Posidonius 1 is about half the correct figure. On 
the whole, their picture of the solar system was not so very far 
from the truth. 

Creek astronomy was geometrical, not dynamic. The ancients 
thought of the motions of the heavenly bodies as uniform and 
circular, or compounded of circular motions. They had not the 
conception of force. There were spheres which moved as a whole, 
and on which the various heavenly bodies were fixed. With Newton 
and gravitation a new point of view, less geometrical, was intro- 
duced. It is curious to observe that there is a reversion to the 
geometrical point of view in Einstein's General Theory of 
Relativity, from which the conception of force, in the Newtonian 
sense, has been banished. 

The problem for the astronomer is this: given the apparent 
motions of the heavenly bodies on the celestial sphere, to introduce, 
by hypothesis, a third co-ordinate, depth, in such a way as to 
make the description of the phenomena as simple as possible. 
The merit of the Coperntcan hypothesis is not truth, but simplicity; 
in view of the relativity of motion, no question of truth is involved. 
The Greeks, in their search for hypotheses which would "save 
the phenomena," were in effect, though not altogether in intention, 
tackling the problem in the scientifically correct way. A com- 

1 Posidonius was Cicero's teacher. He flourished in the latter half of 
the second century u.c 

239 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

parison with their predecessors, and with their successors until 
Copernicus, must convince every student of their truly astonishing 
genius. 

Two very great men, Archimedes and Apollonius, in the third 
century B.C., complete the list of first-class Greek mathematicians. 
Archimedes was a friend, probably a cousin, of the king of 
Syracuse, and was killed when that city was captured by the 
Romans in 212 B.C. Apollonius, from his youth, lived at Alexandria. 
Archimedes was not only a mathematician, but also a physicist 
and student of hydrostatics. Apollonius is chiefly noted for his 
work on conic sections. I shall say no more about them, as they 
came too late to influence philosophy. 

After these two men, though respectable work continued to be 
done in Alexandria, the great age was ended. Under the Roman 
domination, the Greeks lost the self-confidence that belongs to 
political liberty, and in losing it acquired a paralysing respect for 
their predecessors. The Roman soldier who killed Archimedes 
was a symbol of the death of original thought that Rome caused 
throughout the Hellenic world. 



040 



Part 3. Ancient Philosophy after Aristotle 

Chapter XXV 
THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

^ I WE history of the Greek-speaking world in antiquity may 

I be divided into three periods: that of the free City States, 

JL which was brought to an end by Philip and Alexander; 

that of the Macedonian domination, of which the last remnant 

was extinguished by the Roman annexation of Egypt after the 

death of Cleopatra; and finally that of the Roman Empire. Of 

these three periods, the first is characterized by freedom and 

disorder, and second by subjection and disorder, the third by 

subjection and order. 

The second of these periods is known as the Hellenistic age. 
In science and mathematics, the work done during this period is 
the best ever achieved by the Greeks. In philosophy, it includes 
the foundation of the Epicurean and Stoic schools, and also of 
scepticism as a definitely formulated doctrine; it is therefore still 
important philosophically, though less so than the period of Plato 
and Aristotle. After the third century B.C., there is nothing really 
new in Greek philosophy until the Neoplatonists in the third 
century A.D. But meanwhile the Roman world was being prepared 
for the victory of Christianity. 

The brief career of Alexander suddenly transformed the Greek 
world. In the ten years from 334 to 324 B.C., he conquered Asia 
Minor, Syria, Egypt, Babylonia, Persia, Samarcand, Bactria, and 
the Punjab. The Persian Empire, the greatest that the world had 
known, was destroyed by three battles. The ancient lore of the 
Babylonians, along with their ancient superstitions, became 
familiar to Greek curiosity; so did the Zoroastrian dualism and 
(in a lesser degree) die religions of India, where Buddhism was 
moving towards supremacy. Wherever Alexander penetrated, even 
in the mountains of Afghanistan, on the banks of the Jaxattes, 
and on the tributaries of the Indus, he founded Greek cities, in 
which he tried to reproduce Greek institutions, with a measure 

241 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of self-government. Although his army was composed mainly of 
Macedonians, and although most European Greeks submitted to 
him unwillingly, he considered himself, at first, as the apostle of 
Hellenism. Gradually, however, as his conquests extended, he 
adopted the policy of promoting a friendly fusion between Greek 
and barbarian. 

For this he had various motives. On the one hand, it was obvious 
that his armies, which were not very large, could not permanently 
hold so vast an empire by force, but must, in the long run, depend 
upon conciliation of the conquered populations. On the other 
hand, the East was unaccustomed to any form of government 
except that of a divine king, a role which Alexander felt himself 
well fitted to perform. Whether he believed himself a god, or 
only took on the attributes of divinity from motives of policy, is 
a question for the psychologist, since the historical evidence is 
indecisive. In any case, he clearly enjoyed the adulation which 
he received in Egypt as successor of the Pharaohs, and in Persia 
as the Great King. His Macedonian captains the "Companions," 
as they were called had towards him the attitude of western 
nobles to their constitutional sovereign : they refused to prostrate 
themselves before him, they gave advice and criticism even at the 
risk of their lives, and at a crucial moment they controlled his 
actions, when they compelled him to turn homewards from the 
Indus instead of marching on to the conquest of the Ganges. 
Orientals were more accommodating, provided their religious 
prejudices were respected. This offered no difficulty to Alexander; 
it was only necessary to identify Ammon or Bel with Zeus, and 
to declare himself the son of the god. Psychologists observe that 
Alexander hated Philip, and was probably privy to his murder; 
he would have liked to believe that his mother Olympias, like 
some lady of Greek mythology, had been beloved of a god. 
Alexander's career was so miraculous that he may well have 
thought a miraculous origin the best explanation of his prodigious 
success. 

The Greeks had a very strong feeling of superiority to the bar* 
barians; Aristotle no doubt expresses the general view when he 
says that northern races are spirited, southern races civilized, but 
the Greeks alone are both spirited and civilized. Plato and Aris- 
totle thought it wrong to make slaves of Greeks, but not of bar- 
barians. Alexander, who was not quite a Greek, tried to break 

242 



THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

down this attitude of superiority. He himself married two barbarian 
princesses, and he compelled his leading Macedonians to marry 
Persian women of noble birth. His innumerable Greek cities, one 
would suppose, must have contained many more male than female 
colonists, and their men must therefore have followed his example 
in intermarrying with the women of the locality. The result of 
this policy was to bring into the minds of thoughtful men the 
conception of mankind as a whole; the old loyalty to the City 
State and (in a lesser degree) to the Greek race seemed no longer 
adequate. In philosophy, this cosmopolitan point of view begins 
with the Stoics, but in practice it begins earlier, with Alexander. 
It had the result that the interaction of Greek and barbarian was 
reciprocal: the barbarians learnt something of Greek science, 
while the Greeks learnt much of barbarian superstition. Greek 
civilization, in covering a wider area, became less purely Greek. 

Greek civilization was essentially urban. There were, of course, 
many Greeks engaged in agriculture, but they contributed little 
to what was distinctive in Hellenic culture. From the Milesian 
school onwards, the Greeks who were eminent in science and 
philosophy and literature were associated with rich commercial 
cities, often surrounded by barbarian populations. This type of 
civilization was inaugurated, not by the Greeks, but by the Phoe- 
nicians; Tyre and Sidon and Carthage depended on slaves for 
manual labour at home, and on hired mercenaries in the conduct 
of their wars. They did not depend, as modern capital cities do, 
upon large rural populations of the same blood and with equal 
political rights. The nearest modern analogue is to be seen in the 
Far East during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Singapore 
and Hong Kong, Shanghai and the other treaty ports of China, 
were little European islands, where the white men formed a com- 
mercial aristocracy living on coolie labour. In North America, 
north of the Mason- Dixon line, since such labour was not available, 
white men were compelled to practise agriculture. For this reason, 
the hold of the white man on North America is secure, while his 
hold on the Far East has already been greatly diminished, and 
may easily cease altogether. Much of his type of culture, especially 
industrialism, will, however, survive. This analogue will help us 
to understand the position of the Greeks in the 
Alexander's empire. 

The effect of Alexander on the imagination 

241 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and lasting. The First Book of the Maccabees, written centuries 
after his death, opens with an account of his career: 

"And it happened, after that Alexander, son of Philip, the Mace- 
donian, who came out of the land of Chettiim, had smitten Darius, 
king of the Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the 
first over Greece, and made many wars, and won many strong 
holds, and slew the kings of the earth, and went through to the 
ends of the earth, and took spoil of many nations, insomuch that 
the earth was quiet before him; whereupon he was exalted, and 
his heart was lifted up. And he gathered a mighty strong host, and 
ruled over countries, and nations, and kings, who became tri- 
butaries unto him. And after these things he fell sick, and per- 
ceived that he should die. Wherefore he called his servants, such 
as were honorable, and had been brought up with him from his 
youth, and parted his kingdom among them, while he was yet 
alive. 1 So Alexander reigned twelve years, and then died/ 1 

He survived as a legendary hero in the Mohammedan religion, 
and to this day petty chieftains in the Himalayas claim to be 
descended from him. 1 No other hilly historical hero has ever 
furnished such a perfect opportunity for the mythopoeic faculty. 

At Alexander's death, there was an attempt to preserve the 
unit}' of his empire. But of his two sons, one was an infant and 
the other was not yet born. Each had supporters, but in the 
resultant civil war both were thrust aside. In the end, his empire 
was divided between the families of three generals, of whom, 
roughly speaking, one obtained the European, one the African, 
and one the Asiatic parts of Alexander's possessions. The European 
part fell ultimately to Antigonus's descendants; Ptolemy, who 
obtained Egypt, made Alexandria his capital; Seleucus, who 
obtained Asia after many wars, was too busy with campaigns to 
have a fixed capital, but in later times Antioch was the chief city 
of his dynasty. 

Both the Ptolemies and the Seleucids (as the dynasty of Seleu- 
cus was called) abandoned Alexander's attempts to produce a 
fusion of Greek and barbarian, and established military tyrannies 
based, at first, upon their part of the Macedonian army streng- 
thened with Greek mercenaries. The Ptolemies held Egypt fairly 

1 7 % his is not historically true. 

* Perhaps this is no longer true, as the sons of thobc who held thia belief 
have been educated at Eton. 

244 



THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

securely, but in Asia two centuries of confused dynastic wars were 
only ended by the Roman conquest. During these centuries, 
Persia was conquered by the Parthians, and the Bactrian Greeks 
were increasingly isolated. 

In the second century B.C. (after which they rapidly declined) 
they had a king, Menander, whose Indian Empire was very 
extensive. A couple of dialogues between him and a Buddhist sage 
have survived in Pali, and, in part, in a Chinese translation. Dr. 
Tarn suggests that the first of these is based on a Greek original; 
the second, which ends with Menander abdicating and becoming 
a Buddhist saint, is certainly not. 

Buddhism, at this time, was a vigorous proselytizing religion. 
Asoka (264-228), the saintly Buddhist king, records, in a still extant 
inscription, that he sent missionaries to all the Macedonian kings: 
"And this is the cliicfcst conquest in His Majesty's opinion the 
conquest by the Law; this also is that effected by His Majesty both 
in his own dominions and in all the neighbouring realms as far 
as six hundred leagues even to where the Greek king Antiochus 
dwells, and beyond that Antiochus to where dwell the four kings 
severally named Ptolemy, Antigonus, Magas, and Alexander . . , 
and likewise here, in the king's dominions, among the Yonas" 1 
(i.e. the Greeks of the Punjab). Unfortunately no western account 
of these missionaries has survived. 

Babylonia was much more profoundly influenced by Hellenism. 
As we have seen, the only ancient who followed Aristarchus of 
Sarnos in maintaining the Copernican system was Seleucus of 
Sdeucia on the Tigris, who flourished about 150 B.C. Tacitus 
tells us that in the first century A.D. Seleucia had not "lapsed into 
the barbarous usages of the Parthians, but still retained the insti- 
tutions of Seleucus, 8 its Greek founder. Three hundred citizens, 
chosen for their wealth or wisdom, compose as it were a Senate; 
the {x>pulace too have their share of power." 3 Throughout Meso- 
potamia, as further West, Greek became the language of literature 
and culture, and remained so until the Mohammedan conquest. 

Syria (excluding Judea) became completely Hellenized in the 
cities, in so far as language and literature were concerned. But the 
rural populations, which were more conservative, retained the 

1 Quoted in Be van, Housf of ScletAtvs, Vol. I, p. 29811. 
* The king, not die astronomer. 
Book VI, chap. 42. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

religions and the languages to which they were accustomed. 1 In 
Asia Minor, the Greek cities of the coast had, for centuries, had 
an influence on their barbarian neighbours. This was intensified 
by the Macedonian conquest. The first conflict of Hellenism with 
the Jews is related in the Books of the Maccabees. It is a profoundly 
interesting story, unlike anything else in the Macedonian Empire. 
I shall deal with it at a later stage, when I come to the origin and 
growth of Christianity. Elsewhere, Greek influence encountered 
no such stubborn opposition. 

From the point of view of Hellenistic culture, the most brilliant 
success of the third century B.C. was the city of Alexandria. Egypt 
was less exposed to war than the European and Asiatic parts of 
the Macedonian domain, and Alexandria was in an extraordinarily 
favoured position for commerce. The Ptolemies were patrons of 
learning, and attracted to their capital many of the best men of 
the age. Mathematics became, and remained until the fall of Rome, 
mainly Alexandrian. Archimedes, it is true, was a Sicilian, and 
belonged to the one part of the world where the Greek City 
States (until the moment of his death in 212 B.C.) retained their 
independence ; but he too had studied in Alexandria. Eratosthenes 
was chief librarian of the famous library of Alexandria. The 
mathematicians and men of science connected, more or less closely, 
with Alexandria in the third century before Christ were as able 
as any of the Greeks of the previous centuries, and did work of 
equal importance. But they were not, like their predecessors, men 
who took all learning for their province, and propounded universal 
philosophies; they were specialists in the modern sense. Euclid, 
Aristarchus, Archimedes, and Apollonius, were content to be 
mathematicians ; in philosophy they did not aspire to originality. 

Specialization characterized the age in all departments, not only 
in the world of learning. In the self-governing Greek cities of the 
fifth and fourth centuries, a capable man was assumed to be capable 
of everything. He would be, as occasion arose, a soldier, a politician, 
a lawgiver, or a philosopher. Socrates, though he disliked politics, 
could not avoid being mixed up with political disputes. In his 
youth he was a soldier, and (in spite of his disclaimer in the 
Apology) a student of physical science. Protagoras, when he could 
spare time from teaching scepticism to aristocratic youths in search 
of the latest thing, was drawing up a code of laws for Thurii. 
1 See Cambridge Ancient History* VoL V1J, pp. 194-5. 

246 



THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

Plato dabbled in politics, though unsuccessfully. Xenophon, 
when he was neither writing about Socrates nor being a country 
gentleman, spent his spare time as a general. Pythagorean mathe- 
maticians attempted to acquire the government of cities. Every- 
body had to serve on juries and perform various other public 
duties. In the third century all this was changed. There continued, 
it is true, to be politics in the old City States, but they had become 
parochial and unimportant, since Greece was at the mercy of 
Macedonian aimies. The serious struggles for power were between 
Macedonian soldiers ; they involved no question of principle, but 
merely the distribution of territory between rival adventurers. On 
administrative and technical matters, these more or less unedu- 
cated soldiers employed Greeks as experts; in Egypt, for example, 
excellent work was done in irrigation and drainage. There were 
soldiers, administrators, physicians, mathematicians, philosophers, 
but there was no one who was all these at once. 

The age was one in which a man who had money and no desire 
for power could enjoy a very pleasant life always assuming that 
no marauding army happened to come his way. Learned men who 
found favour with some prince could enjoy a high degree of luxury, 
provided they were adroit flatterers and did not mind being the 
butt of ignorant royal witticisms. But there was no such thing as 
security. A palace revolution might displace the sycophantic 
sage's patron; the Galatians might destroy the rich man's villa; 
one's city might be sacked as an incident in a dynastic war. In 
such circumstances it is no wonder that people took to worshipping 
the goddess Fortune, or Luck. There seemed nothing rational in 
the ordering of human affairs. Those who obstinately insisted 
upon finding rationality somewhere withdrew into themselves, 
and decided, like Milton's Satan, that 

The mind is its own place, and in itself 
Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven. 

Except for adventurous self-seekers, there was no longer any 
incentive to take an interest in public affairs. After the brilliant 
episode of Alexander's conquests, the Hellenistic world was 
sinking into chaos, for lack of a despot strong enough to achieve 
stable supremacy, or a principle powerful enough to produce 
social cohesion. Greek intelligence, confronted with new political 
problems, showed complete incompetence. The Romans, no 

247 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

doubt, were stupid and brutal compared to the Greeks, but at 
least they created order. The old disorder of the days of freedom 
had been tolerable, because every citizen had a share in it; but 
the new Macedonian disorder, imposed upon subjects by incom- 
petent rulers, was utterly intolerable far more so than the subse- 
quent subjection to Rome. 

There was widespread social discontent and fear of revolution. 
The wages of free labour fell, presumably owing to the competition 
of eastern slave labour; and meantime the prices of necessaries 
rose. One finds Alexander, at the outset of his enterprise, having 
time to make treaties designed to keep the poor in their place. 
"In the treaties made in 335 between Alexander and the States 
of the League of Corinth it was provided that the Council of the 
League and Alexander's representative were to see to it that in 
no city of the League should there be either confiscation of per- 
sonal property, or division of land, or cancellation of debt, or 
liberation of slaves for the purpose of revolution." 1 The temples, 
in the Hellenistic world, were the bankers; they owned the gold 
reserve, and controlled credit. In the early third century, the 
temple of Apollo at Delos made loans at ten per cent ; formerly, 
the rate of interest had been higher. 2 

Free labourers who found wages insufficient even for bare 
necessities must, if young and vigorous, have been able to obtain 
employment as mercenaries. The life of a mercenary, no doubt, 
was filled with hardships and dangers, but it also had great possi- 
bilities. There might be the loot of some rich eastern city ; there 
might be a chance of lucrative mutiny. It must have been dangerous 
for a commander to attempt to disband his army, and this must 
have been one of the reasons why wars were almost continuous. 

The old civic spirit more or less survived in the old Greek 
cities, but not in the new cities founded by Alexander not ex- 
cepting Alexandria. In earlier times, a new city was always a 
colony composed of emigrants from some one older city, and it 
remained connected with its parent by a bond of sentiment. This 
kind of sentiment had great longevity, as is shown, for example, 
by the diplomatic activities of Lampsacus on the Hellespont in 

1 "The Social Question in the Third Century," by W W. Tarn, in 7Vi 
Hellenistic Age by various authors. Cambridge, 1923. This essay is exceed* 
ingly interesting, and contains many facts nor elsewhere readily accessible. 

' Ibid. 



THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

the year 196 B.C. This city was threatened with subjugation by the 
Seleucid King Antiochus III, and decided to appeal to Rome for 
protection. An embassy was sent, but it did not go direct to Rome ; 
it went first, in spite of the immense distance, to Marseilles, which, 
like Lampsacus, was a colony of Phocaea, and was, moreover, 
viewed with friendly eyes by the Romans. The citizens of Mar- 
seilles, having listened to an oration by the envoy, at once decided 
to send a diplomatic mission of their own to Rome to support 
their sister city. The Gauls who lived inland from Marseilles 
joined in with a letter to their kinsmen of Asia Minor, the 
Galatians, recommending Lampsacus to their friendship. Rome, 
naturally, was glad of a pretext for meddling in the affairs of Asia 
Minor, and by Rome's intervention Lampsacus preserved its 
freedom until it became inconvenient to the Romans. 1 

In general, the rulers of Asia called themselves "Phil-Hellene," 
and befriended the old Greek cities as far as policy and military 
necessity allowed. The cities desired, and (when they could) 
claimed as a right, democratic self-government, absence of tribute, 
and freedom from a royal garrison. It was worth while to conciliate 
them, because they were rich, they could supply mercenaries, and 
many of them had important harbours. But if they took the wrong 
side in a civil war, they exposed themselves to sheer conquest. 
On the whole, the Seleucids, and the other dynasties which 
gradually grew up, dealt tolerably with them, but there were 
exceptions. 

The new cities, though they had a measure of self-government, 
had not the same traditions as the older ones. Their citizens were 
not of homogeneous origin, but were from all parts of Greece. 
They were in the main adventurers like the conquistadors or the 
settlers in Johannesburg, not pious pilgrims like the earlier Greek 
colonists or the New England pioneers. Consequently no one of 
Alexander's cities formed a strong political unit. This was con- 
venient from the standpoint of the king's government, but a 
weakness from the standpoint of the spread of Hellenism. 

The influence of non-Greek religion and superstition in the 
Hellenistic world was mainly, but not wholly, bad. This might 
not have been the case. Jews, Persians, and Buddhists all had 
religions that were very definitely superior to the popular Greek 
polytheism, and could even have been studied with profit by the 
1 Heyan, House of Seleucut, Vol. II, pp. 45-0. 

H9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

best philosophers. Unfortunately it was the Babylonians, or 
Chaldeans, who most impressed the imagination of the Greeks. 
There was, first of all, their fabulous antiquity ; the priestly records 
went back for thousands of years, and professed to go back for 
thousands more. Then there was some genuine wisdom: the 
Babylonians could more or less predict eclipses long before the 
Greeks could. But these were merely causes of receptiveness; 
what was received was mainly astrology and magic. "Astrology," 
says Professor Gilbert Murray, "fell upon the Hellenistic mind as 
a new disease falls upon some remote island people. The tomb of 
Ozymandias, as described by Diodorus, was covered with astro- 
logical symbols, and that of Antiochus I, which has been dis- 
covered in Commagene, is of the same character. It was natural 
for monarchs to believe that the stars watched over them. But 
every one was ready to receive the germ." 1 It appears that astrology 
was first taught to the Greeks in the time of Alexander, by a 
Chaldean named Berosus, who taught in Cos, and, according to 
Seneca, "interpreted Bel." "This," says Professor Murray, "must 
mean that he translated into Greek the 'Eye of Bel,' a treatise in 
seventy tablets found in the library of Assur-bani-pal (686-626 B.C.) 
but composed for Sargon I in the third millennium B.C." (ibid., 
p. 176). 

As we shall see, the majority even of the best philosophers fell 
in with the belief in astrology. It involved, since it thought the 
future predictable, a belief in necessity or fate, which could be 
set against the prevalent belief in fortune. No doubt most men 
believed in both, and never noticed the inconsistency. 

The general confusion was bound to bring moral decay, even 
more than intellectual enfeeblement. Ages of prolonged uncer- 
tainty, while they are compatible with the highest degree of saintli- 
ness in a few, are inimical to the prosaic every-day virtues of 
respectable citizens. There seems no use in thrift, when to-morrow 
all your savings may be dissipated ; no advantage in honesty, when 
the man towards whom you practise it is pretty sure to swindle 
you ; no point in steadfast adherence to a cause, when no cause is 
important or has a chance of stable victory ; no argument in favour 
of truthfulness, when only supple tergiversation makes the pre- 
servation of life and fortune possible. The man whose virtue has 
no source except a purely terrestrial prudence will, in such a world, 
1 Fit* Stag* of Gfttk Reti0<m 9 pp. 17778 



THE HELLENISTIC WORLD 

become an adventurer if he has the courage, and, if not, will seek 
obscurity as a timid time-server. 
Menander, who belongs to this age, says: 

So many cases I have known 
Of men who, though not naturally rogues, 
Became so, through misfortune, by constraint. 

This sums up the moral character of the third century B.C., 
except for a few exceptional men. Even among these few, fear 
took the place of hope ; the purpose of life was rather to escape 
misfortune than to achieve any positive good. "Metaphysics sink 
into the background, and ethics, now individual, become of the 
first importance. Philosophy is no longer the pillar of fire going 
before a few intrepid seekers after truth : it is rather an ambulance 
following in the wake of the struggle for existence and picking up 
the weak and wounded." 1 

1 C. F. Angus in Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. VII, p. 231. The 
above quotation from Menander is taken from the same chapter. 



251 



Chapter XXVI 
CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

E I IHE relation of intellectually eminent men to contemporary 
I society has been very different in different ages. In some 
JL fortunate epochs they have been on the whole in harmony 
with their surroundings suggesting, no doubt, such reforms as 
seemed to them necessary, but fairly confident that their sugges- 
tions would be welcomed, and not disliking the world in which 
they found themselves even if it remained unreformed. At other 
times they have been revolutionary, considering that radical 
alterations were called for, but expecting that, partly as a result 
of their advocacy, these alterations would be brought about in the 
near future. At yet other times they have despaired of the world, 
and felt that, though they themselves knew what was needed, 
there was no hope of its being brought about. This mood sinks 
easily into the deeper despair which regards life on earth as 
essentially bad, and hopes for good only in a future life or in 
some mystical transfiguration. 

In some ages, all these attitudes have been adopted by different 
men living at the same time. Consider, for example, the early 
nineteenth century. Goethe is comfortable, Bentharn is a reformer, 
Shelley is a revolutionary, and Leopardi is a pessimist. But in 
most periods there has been a prevailing tone among great writers. 
In England they were comfortable under Elizabeth and in the 
eighteenth century; in France, they became revolutionary about 
1750; in Germany, they have been nationalistic since 1813. 

During the period of ecclesiastical domination, from the fifth 
century to the fifteenth, there was a certain conflict between what 
was theoretically believed and what was actually felt. Theoretically, 
the world was a vale of tears, a preparation, amid tribulation, for 
the world to come. But in practice the writers of hooks, being 
almost all clerics, could not help feeling exhilarated by the power 
of the Church; they found opportunity for abundant activity of 
a sort that they believed to be useful. They had therefore the 
mentality of a governing class, not of men who feel themselves 
exiles in an alien world. This is part of the curious dualism that 
runs through the Middle Ages, owing to the fact that the Church, 

252 



CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

chough based on other-worldly beliefs, was the most important 
institution in the every-day world. 

The psychological preparation for the other-worldliness of 
Christianity begins in the Hellenistic period, and is connected 
with the eclipse of the City State. Down to Aristotle, Greek philo- 
sophers, though they might complain of this or that, were, in 
the main, not cosmically despairing, nor did they feel themselves 
politically impotent. They might, at times, belong to a beaten 
party, but, if so, their defeat was due to the chances of conflict, 
not to any inevitable powerlessness of the wise. Even those who, 
like Pythagoras, and Plato in certain moods, condemned the world 
of appearance and sought escape in mysticism, had practical plans 
for turning the governing classes into saints and sages. When 
political power passed into the hands of the Macedonians, Greek 
philosophers, as was natural, turned aside from politics and 
devoted themselves more to the problem of individual virtue or 
salvation. They no longer asked: how can men create a good 
State? They asked instead: how can men be virtuous in a wicked 
world, or happy in a world of suffering? The change, it is true, 
is only one of degree ; such questions had been asked before, and 
the later Stoics, for a time, again concerned themselves with 
politics the politic^ of Rome, not of Greece. But the change was 
none the less real. Except to a limited extent during the Roman 
period in Stoicism, the outlook of those who thought and felt 
seriously became increasingly subjective and individualistic, until, 
at last, Christianity evolved a gospel of individual salvation which 
inspired missionary zeal and created the Church. Until that 
happened, there was no institution to which the philosopher could 
give whole-hearted adherence, and therefore there was no ade- 
cjuate outlet for his legitimate love of power. For this reason, the 
philosophers of the Hellenistic period are more limited as human 
beings than the men who lived while the City State could still 
inspire allegiance. They still think, because they cannot help 
thinking; but they scarcely hope that their thought will bear fruit 
in the world of affairs. 

Four schools of philosophy were founded about the time of 
Alexander. The two most famous, the Stoics and Epicureans, 
will be the subjects of later chapters ; in the present chapter we 
shall be concerned with the Cynics and Sceptics. 

The first of these schools is derived, through its founder Dio- 

2 53 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

genes, from Amisthenes, a disciple of Socrates, about twenty 
years older than Plato. Antisthenes was a remarkable character, 
in some ways rather like Tolstoy. Until after the death of Socrates, 
he lived in the aristocratic circle of his fellow disciples, and 
showed no sign of unorthodoxy. But something whether the 
defeat of Athens, or the death of Socrates, or a distaste for philo- 
sophic quibbling caused him, when no longer young, to despise 
the things that he had formerly valued. He would have nothing 
but simple goodness. He associated with working men, and 
dressed as one of them. He took to open-air preaching, in a style 
that the uneducated could understand. All refined philosophy he 
held to be worthless; what could be known, could be known by 
the plain man. He believed in the "return to nature/ 1 and carried 
this belief very far. There was to be no government, no private 
property, no marriage, no established religion. His followers, if 
not he himself, condemned slavery. He was not exactly ascetic, 
but he despised luxury and all pursuit of artificial pleasures of 
the senses. "I had rather be mad than delighted/' he said. 1 

The fame of Antisthenes was surpassed by that of his disciple 
Diogenes, "a young man from Sinope, on the Euxine, whom he 
[Antisthenes] did not take to at first sight ; the son of a disreputable 
money-changer who had been sent to prison for defacing the 
coinage. Antisthenes ordered the lad away, but he paid no attention ; 
he beat him with his stick, but he never moved. He wanted 
'wisdom/ and saw that Antisthenes had it to give. His aim in 
life was to do as his father had done, to 'deface the coinage/ but 
on a much larger scale. He would deface all the coinage current 
in the world. Every conventional stamp was false. The men 
stamped as generals and kings; the things stamped as honour and 
wisdom and happiness and riches ; all were base metal with lying 
superscription/'* 

He decided to live like a dog, and was therefore called a "cynic," 
which means "canine." He rejected all conventions whether of 
religion, of manners, of dress, of housing, of food, or of decency. 
One is told that he lived in a tub, but Gilbert Murray assures us 
that this is a mistake: it was a large pitcher, of the sort used in 
primitive times for burials. 8 He lived, like an Indian fakir, by 
begging. He proclaimed his brotherhood, not only with the whole 

1 Benn, Vol. II, pp. 4, 5: Murray, Five Stagey pp. 113-14. 

9 Ibid., p. 117. Ibid., p. no. 



CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

human race, but also with animals. He was a man about whom 
stories gathered, even in his lifetime. Everyone knows how 
Alexander visited him, and asked if he desired any favour ; "only 
to stand out of my light/' he replied. 

The teaching of Diogenes was by no means what we now call 
"cynical" quite the contrary. He had an ardent passion for 
"virtue," in comparison with which he held worldly goods of no 
account. He sought virtue and moral freedom in liberation from 
desire: be indifferent to the goods that fortune has to bestow, 
and you will be emancipated from fear. In this respect, his doctrine, 
as we shall see, was taken up by the Stoics, but they did not follow 
him in rejecting the amenities of civilization. He considered that 
Prometheus was justly punished for bringing to man the arts that 
have produced the complication and artificiality of modern life. 
In this he resembled the Taoists and Rousseau and Tolstoy, but 
was more consistent than they were. 

His doctrine, though he was a contemporary of Aristotle, 
belongs in its temper to the Hellenistic age. Aristotle is the last 
Greek philosopher who faces the world cheerfully ; after him, all 
have, in one form or another, a philosophy of retreat. The world 
is bad ; let us learn to be independent of it. External goods are 
precarious ; they are the gift of fortune, not the reward of our own 
efforts. Only subjective goods virtue, or contentment through 
resignation are secure, and these alone, therefore, will be valued 
by the wise man. Diogenes personally was a man full of vigour, 
but his doctrine, like all those of the Hellenistic age, was one to 
appeal to weary men, in whom disappointment had destroyed 
natural zest. And it was certainly not a doctrine calculated to 
promote art or science or statesmanship, or any useful activity 
except one of protest against powerful evil. 

It is interesting to observe what the Cynic teaching became 
when it was popularized. In the early part of the third century B.C., 
the cynics were the fashion, especially in Alexandria. They 
published little sermons pointing out how easy it is to do without 
material possessions, how happy one can be on simple food, how 
warm one can keep in winter without expensive clothes (which 
might be true in Egypt I), how silly it is to feel affection for one's 
native country, or to mourn when one's children or friends die. 
"Because my son or my wife is dead/* says Teles, who was one 
of these popularizing Cynics, "is that any reason for my neglecting 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

myself, who am still alive, and ceasing to look after my property ?"* 
At this point, it becomes difficult to feel any sympathy with the 
simple life, which has grown altogether too simple. One wonders 
who enjoyed these sermons. Was it the rich, who wished to think 
the sufferings of the poor imaginary? Or was it the new poor, 
who were trying to despise the successful business man ? Or was 
it sycophants who persuaded themselves that the charity they 
accepted was unimportant? Teles says to a rich man: "You give 
liberally and I take valiantly from you, neither grovelling nor 
demeaning myself basely nor grumbling." 2 A very convenient 
doctrine. Popular Cynicism did not teach abstinence from the good 
things of this world, but only a certain indifference to them. In 
the case of a borrower, this might take the form of minimizing 
the obligation to the lender. One can see how the word "cynic" 
acquired its everyday meaning. 

What was best in the Cynic doctrine passed over into Stoicism, 
which was an altogether more complete and rounded philosophy. 

Scepticism, as a doctrine of the schools, was first proclaimed 
by Pyrrho, who was in Alexander's army, and campaigned with 
it as far as India. It seems that this gave him a sufficient taste of 
travel, and that he spent the rest of his life in his native city, Elis, 
where he died in 275 B.C. There was not much that was new in 
his doctrine, beyond a certain systematizing and formalizing of 
older doubts. Scepticism with regard to the senses had troubled 
Greek philosophers from a very early stage ; the only exceptions 
were those who, like Parmenides and Plato, denied the cognitive 
value of perception, and made their denial into an opportunity 
for an intellectual dogmatism. The Sophists, notably Protagoras 
and Gorgias, had been led by the ambiguities and apparent con- 
tradictions of sense-perception to a subjectivism not unlike I luine's. 
Pyrrho seems (for he very wisely wrote no books) to have added 
moral and logical scepticism to scepticism as to the senses. He 
is said to have maintained that there could never be any rational 
ground for preferring one course of action to another. In practice, 
this meant that one conformed to the customs of whatever country 
one inhabited. A modem disciple would go to church on Sundays 
and perform the correct genuflexions, but without any of the 
religious beliefs that are supposed to inspire these actions. Ancient 

1 The Hellemstif Age (Cambridge, 1923), p. 84 11. 
* Ibid., p. 86. 



CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

Sceptics went through the whole pagan ritual, and were even 
sometimes priests; their Scepticism assured them that this 
behaviour could not be proved wrong, and their common sense 
(which survived their philosophy) assured them that it was con- 
venient. 

Scepticism naturally made an appeal to many unphilosophic 
minds. People observed the diversity of schools and the acerbity 
of their disputes, and decided that all alike were pretending to 
knowledge which was in fact unattainable. Scepticism was a lazy 
man's consolation, since it showed the ignorant to be as wise as 
the reputed men of learning. To men who, by temperament, 
required a gospel, it might seem unsatisfying, but like every 
doctrine of the Hellenistic period it recommended itself as an 
antidote to worry. Why trouble about the future? It is wholly 
uncertain. You may as well enjoy the present; "what's to come 
is still unsure/ 1 For these reasons, Scepticism enjoyed a con- 
siderable popular success. 

It should be observed that Scepticism as a philosophy is not 
merely doubt, but what may be called dogmatic doubt. The man 
of science says "I think it is so-and-so, but I am not sure." The 
man of intellectual curiosity says "I don't know how it is, but I 
hope to find out." The philosophical Sceptic says "nobody knows, 
and nobody ever can know/' It is this element of dogmatism that 
makes the system vulnerable. Sceptics, of course, deny that they 
assert the impossibility of knowledge dogmatically, but their 
denials are not very convincing. 

Pyrrho's disciple Timon, however, advanced some intellectual 
arguments which, from the standpoint of Greek logic, were very 
hard to answer. The only logic admitted by the Greeks was de- 
ductive, and all deduction had to start, like Euclid, from general 
principles regarded as self-evident. Timon denied the possibility 
of finding such principles. Everything* therefore, will have to be 
proved by means of something else, and all argument will be 
either circular or an endless chain hanging from nothing. In either 
case nothing can be proved. This argument, as we can see, cut 
at the root of the Aristotelian philosophy which dominated the 
Middle Ages. 

Some forms of Scepticism which, in our own day, arc advocated 
by men who arc by no means wholly sceptical, had not occurred 
to the Sceptics of antiquity. They did not doubt phenomena, or 

//Mlur> <>/ 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

question propositions which, in their opinion, only expressed 
what we know directly concerning phenomena. Most of Timon's 
work is lost, but two surviving fragments will illustrate this point. 
One says "The phenomenon is always valid." The other says: 
"That honey w sweet I refuse to assert ; that it appears sweet, I 
fully grant." 1 A modern Sceptic would point out that the pheno- 
menon merely occurs, and is not either valid or invalid; what is 
valid or invalid must be a statement, and no statement can be so 
closely linked to the phenomenon as to be incapable of falsehood. 
For the same reason, he would say that the statement "honey 
appears sweet" is only highly probable, not absolutely certain. 

In some respects, the doctrine of Timon was very similar to 
that of Hume. He maintained that something which had never 
been observed atoms, for instance could not be validly inferred ; 
but when two phenomena had been frequently observed together, 
one could be inferred fiom the other. 

Timon lived at Athens throughout the later years of his long 
life, and died there in 235 B.C. With his death, the school of 
Pyrrho, as a school, came to an end, but his doctrines, somewhat 
modified, were taken up, strange as it may seem, by the Academy, 
which represented the Platonic tradition. 

The man who effected this surprising philosophic revolution 
was Arcesilaus, a contemporary of Timon, who died as an old 
man about 240 B.C. What most men have taken from Plato is 
belief in a supersensible intellectual world and in the superiority 
of the immortal soul to the mortal body. But Plato was many- 
sided, and in some respects could be regarded as teaching scep- 
ticism. The Platonic Socrates professes to know nothing; we 
naturally treat this as irony, but it could be taken seriously. 
Many of the dialogues reach no positive conclusion, and aim at 
leaving the reader in a state of doubt. Some the latter half of 
the Parmenide*, for instance might seem to have no purpose 
except to show that either side of any question can be maintained 
with equal plausibility. The Platonic dialectic could be treated 
as an end, rather than a means, and if so treated it lent itself 
admirably to the advocacy of Scepticism. This seems to have 
been the way in which Arcesilaus interpreted the man whom he 
still professed to follow. He had decapitated Plato, but at any rate 
the torso that remained was genuine. 

1 Quoted by Edwyn Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 126. 



CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

The manner in which Arcesilaus taught would have had much 
to commend it, if the young men who learnt from him had been 
able to avoid being paralysed by it. He maintained no thesis, but 
would refute any thesis set up by a pupil. Sometimes he would 
himself advance two contradictory propositions on successive 
occasions, showing how to argue convincingly in favour of either. 
A pupil sufficiently vigorous to rebel might have learnt dexterity 
and the avoidance of fallacies ; in fact, none seem to have learnt 
anything except cleverness and indifference to truth. So great 
was the influence of Arcesilaus that the Academy remained 
sceptical for about two hundred years. 

In the middle of this sceptical period, an amusing incident 
occurred. Carneades, a worthy successor of Arcesilaus as head of 
the Academy, was one of three philosophers sent by Athens on 
a diplomatic mission to Rome in the year 156 B.C. He saw no 
reason why his ambassadorial dignity should interfere with the 
main chance, so he announced a course of lectures in Rome. The 
young men, who, at that time, were anxious to ape Greek manners 
and acquire Greek culture, flocked to hear him. His first lecture 
expounded the views of Aristotle and Plato on justice, and was 
thoroughly edifying. His second, however, was concerned in 
refuting all that he had said in his first, not with a view to estab- 
lishing opposite conclusions, but merely to show that every con- 
clusion is unwarranted. Plato's Socrates had argued that to inflict 
injustice was a greater evil to the perpetrator than to suffer it. 
Carneadcs, in his second lecture, treated this contention with 
scorn. Great States, he pointed out, had become great by unjust 
aggressions against their weaker neighbours; in Rome, this could 
not well be denied. In a shipwreck, you may save your life at the 
expense of some one weaker, and you are a fool if you do not. 
"Women and children first," he seems to think, is not a maxim 
that leads to personal survival. What would you do if you were 
flying from a victorious enemy, you had lost your horse, but you 
found a wounded comrade on a horse? If you were sensible, you 
would drag him off and seize his horse, whatever justice might 
ordain. All this not very edifying argumentation is surprising in 
a nominal follower of Plato, but it seems to have pleased the 
modern-minded Roman youths. 

There was one man whom it did not please, and that was the 
Cato, who represented the stern, stiff, stupid, and brutal 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

moral code by means of which Rome had defeated Carthage. 
From youth to old age, he lived simply, rose early, practised 
severe manual labour, ate only coarse food, and never wore a 
gown that cost over a hundred pence. Towards the State he was 
scrupulously honest, avoiding all bribery and plunder. He exacted 
of other Romans all the virtues that he practised himself, and 
asserted that to accuse and pursue the wicked was the best thing 
an honest man could do. He enforced, as far as he could, the old 
Roman severity of manners: 

"Cato put out of the Senate also, one Manilius, who was in 
great towardness to have been made Consul the next year following, 
only because he kissed his wife too lovingly in the day time, and 
before his daughter: and reproving him for it, he told him, his 
wife never kissed him, but when it thundered." 1 

When he was in power, he put down luxury and feasting. He 
made his wife suckle not only her own children, but also those of 
his slaves, in order that, having been nourished by the same milk, 
they might love his children. When his slaves were too old to 
work, he sold them remorselessly. He insisted that his slaves 
should always be either working or sleeping. He encouraged his 
slaves to quarrel with each other, for "he could not abide that 
they should be friends." When a slave had committed a grave 
fault, he would call in his other slaves, and induce them to condemn 
the delinquent to death; he would then carry out the sentence 
with his own hands in the presence of the survivors. 

The contrast between Cato and Carneades was very complete: 
the one brutal through a morality that was too strict and too 
traditional, the other ignoble through a morality that was too 
lax and too much infected with the social dissolution of the 
Hellenistic world. 

"Marcus Cato, even from the beginning that young men began 
to study the Greek tongue, and that it grew in estimation in Rome, 
did dislike of it: fearing lest the youth of Rome that were desirous 
of learning and eloquence, would utterly give over the honour and 
glory of arms. ... So lie openly found fault one day in the 
Senate, that the Ambassadors were long there, and had no dis- 
patch : considering also they were cunning men, and could easily 
persuade what they would. And if there were no other respect, 
this only might persuade them to determine some answer for 
1 North's Plutarch, Lftto, Marcus Cato. 



CYNICS AND SCEPTICS 

them, and to send them home again to their schools, to teach 
their children of Greece, and to let alone the children of Rome, 
that they might learn to obey the laws and the Senate, as they 
had done before. Now he spake thus to the Senate, not of any 
private ill will or malice he bare to Carneades, as some men 
thought: but because he generally hated philosophy." 1 

The Athenians, in Cato's view, were a lesser breed without the 
law; it did not matter if they were degraded by the shallow soph- 
istries of intellectuals, but the Roman youth must be kept puri- 
tanical, imperialistic, ruthless, and stupid. He failed, however; 
later Romans, while retaining many of his vices, adopted those of 
Carneades also. 

The next head of the Academy, after Carneades (ca. 180 to 
ca. no B.C.), was a Carthaginian whose real name was Hasdrubal, 
but who, in his dealings with Greeks, preferred to call himself 
Clitomachus. Unlike Carneades, who confined himself to lec- 
turing, Clitomachus wrote over four hundred books, some of 
them in the Phoenician language. His principles appear to have 
been the same as those of Carneades. In some respects, they were 
useful. These two Sceptics set themselves against the belief in 
divination, magic, and astrology, which was becoming more and 
more widespread. They also developed a constructive doctrine, 
concerning degrees of probability: although we can never be 
justified in feeling certainty, some things are more likely to be 
true than others. Probability should be our guide in practice, since 
it is reasonable to act on the most probable of possible hypo- 
theses. This view is one with which most modern philosophers 
would agree. Unfortunately, the books setting it forth are lost, and 
it is difficult to reconstruct the doctrine from the hints that remain. 

After Clitomachus, the Academy ceased to be sceptical, and from 
the time of Antiochus (who died in 69 B.C.) its doctrines became, 
for centuries, practically indistinguishable from those of the Stoics. 

Scepticism, however, did not disappear. It was revived by the 
Cretan Aenesidemus, who came from Knossos, where, for aught 
we know, there may have been Sceptics two thousand years earlier, 
entertaining dissolute courtiers with doubts as to the divinity of 
the mistress of animals. The date of Aenesidemus is uncertain. 
He threw over the doctrines on probability advocated by Carneades, 
and reverted to the earliest forms of Scepticism. 11 is influence was 
1 North's Plutarch, Ltvtt, Marcus Cato 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

considerable; he was followed by the satirist Lucian in the second 
century A.D., and also, slightly later, by Sextus Empiricus, the 
only Sceptic philosopher of antiquity whose works survive. There 
is, for example, a short treatise, "Arguments Against Belief in a 
God," translated by Edwyn Bevan in his Later Greek Religion, 
pp. 52-56, and said by him to be probably taken by Sextus 
Empiricus from Carneades, as reported by Clitomachus. 

This treatise begins by explaining that, in behaviour, the Sceptics 
are orthodox: "We sceptics follow in practice the way of the world, 
but without holding any opinion about it. We speak of the Gods 
as existing and offer worship to the Gods and say that they exercise 
providence, but in saying this we express no belief, and avoid the 
rashness of the dogmatize rs." 

He then argues that people differ as to the nature of God ; for 
instance, some think Him corporeal, some incorporeal. Since we 
have no experience of Him, we cannot know His attributes. The 
existence of God is not self-evident, and therefore needs proof. 
There is a somewhat confused argument to show that no such 
proof is possible. He next takes up the problem of evil, and 
concludes with the words: 

"Those who affirm positively that God exists cannot avoid falling 
into an impiety. For if they say that God controls everything, 
they make Him the author of evil things; if, on the other hand, 
they say that He controls some things only, or that He controls 
nothing, they are compelled to make God cither grudging or 
impotent, and to do that is quite obviously an impiety/' 

Scepticism, while it continued to appeal to some cultivated indi- 
viduals until somewhere in the third century A.D., was contrary 
to the temper of the age, which was turning more and more to 
dogmatic religion and doctrines of salvation. Scepticism had 
enough force to make educated men dissatisfied with the State 
religions, but it had nothing positive, even in the purely intellectual 
sphere, to offer in their place. From the Renaissance onwards, 
theological scepticism has been supplemented, in most of its 
advocates, by an enthusiastic belief in science, but in antiquity 
there was no such supplement to doubt. Without answering the 
arguments of the Sceptics, the ancient world turned aside from 
them. The Olympians being discredited, the way was left clear 
for an invasion of oriental religions, which competed for the 
favour of the superstitious until the triumph of Christianity. 

262 



Chapter XXVII 
THE EPICUREANS 

p I 1HE two great new schools of the Hellenistic period, the 
I Stoics and Epicureans, were contemporaneous in their 
JL foundation. Their founders, Zeno and Epicurus, were born 
at about the same time, and settled in Athens as heads of their 
respective sects within a few years of each other. It is therefore 
a matter of taste which to consider first. I shall begin with the 
Epicureans, because their doctrines were fixed once for all by 
their founder, whereas Stoicism had a long development, 
extending as far as the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who died 
in A.D. 1 80. 

The main authority for the life of Epicurus is Diogenes Laertius, 
who lived in the third century A.D. There are, however, two diffi- 
culties: first, Diogenes Laertius is himself ready to accept legends 
of little or no historical value; second, part of his Life consists in 
reporting the scandalous accusations brought against Epicurus by 
the Stoics, and it is not always clear whether he is asserting some- 
thing himself or merely mentioning a libel. The scandals invented 
by the Stoics are facts about them, to be remembered when their 
lofty morality is praised; but they are not facts about Epicurus. 
For instance, there was a legend that his mother was a quack 
priestess, as to which Diogenes says: 

"They (apparently the Stoics) say that he used to go round 
from house to house with his mother reading out the purification 
prayers, and assisted his father in elementary teaching for a 
miserable pittance." 

On this Bailey comments: 1 "If there is any truth in the story 
that he went about with his mother as an acolyte, reciting the 
formulae of her incantations, he may well have been inspired in 
quite early years with the hatred of superstition, which was after- 
wards so prominent a feature in his teaching." This theory is 
attractive, but, in view of the extreme unscrupulousness of later 
antiquity in inventing a scandal, I do not think it can be accepted 

1 The Greek Atomitts and Epicurus, by Cyril Bailey, Oxford, 1928, 
p. 221. Mr. Bailey has made a specialty of Epicurus, and his book is 
invaluable to the student. 

63 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as having any foundation. 1 There is against it the fact that he 
had an unusually strong affection for his mother. 2 

The main facts of the life of Epicurus seem, however, fairly 
certain. His father was a poor Athenian colonist in Samos ; Epi- 
curus was born in 342-1 B.C., but whether in Samos or in Attica 
is not known. In any case, his boyhood was passed in Samos. He 
states that he took to the study of philosophy at the age of fourteen. 
At the age of eighteen, about the time of Alexander's death, he 
went to Athens, apparently to establish his citizenship, but while 
he was there the Athenian colonists were turned out of Samos 
(322 B.C.). The family of Epicurus became refugees in Asia Minor, 
where he rejoined them. At Taos, either at this time, or perhaps 
earlier, he was taught philosophy by a certain Nausiphanes, 
apparently a follower of Democritus. Although his mature philo- 
sophy owes more to Democritus than to any other philosopher, 
he never expressed anything but contempt for Nausiphanes, 
whom he alluded to as "The Mollusc." 

In the year 311 he founded his school, which was first in 
Mitylene, then in Lampsacus, and, from 307 onwards, in Athens, 
where he died in 270-1 B.C. 

After the hard years of his youth, his life in Athens was placid, 
and was only troubled by his ill health. He had a house and a 
garden (apparently separate from the house), and it was in the 
garden that he taught. His three brothers, and some others, had 
been members of his school from the first, but in Athens his 
community was increased, not only by philosophic disciples, but 
by friends and their children, slaves and hetaerae. These last were 
made an occasion of scandal by his enemies, but apparently quite 
unjustly. He had a very exceptional capacity for purely human 
friendship, and wrote pleasant letters to the young children of 
members of the community. He did not practise that dignity and 
reserve in the expression of the emotions that was expected of 
ancient philosophers; his letters are amazingly natural and 
unaffected. 

The life of the community was very simple, partly on principle, 

1 The Stoics were very unjust to Epicurus. Epictctus, for example, 
addressing him, says; "This is the life of which you pronounce yourself 
worthy: eating, drinking, copulation, evacuation and snoring." Book II, 
chap, n, Ditcoune* of Epictctus. 

a Gilbert Murray, Five Stages, p. 130 



THE EPICUREANS 

and partly (no doubt) for lack of money. Their food and drink 
was mainly bread and water, which Epicurus found quite satis- 
fying. "I am thrilled with pleasure in the body," he says, "when 
I live on bread and water, and I spit on luxurious pleasures, not 
for their own sake, but because of the inconveniences that follow 
them." The community depended financially, at least in part, 
on voluntary contributions. "Send me some preserved cheese," 
he writes, "that when I like, I may have a feast." To another 
friend: "Send us offerings for the sustenance of our holy body 
on behalf of yourself and your children." And again: "The only 

contribution I require is that which ordered the disciples to 

send me, even if they be among the Hyperboreans. I wish to 
receive from each of you two hundred and twenty drachmae 1 a 
year and no more." 

Epicurus suffered all his life from bad health, but learnt to 
endure it with great fortitude. It was he, not a Stoic, who first 
maintained that a man could be happy on the rack. Two letters 
written, one a few days before his death, the other on the day of 
his death, show that he had some right to this opinion. The first 
says: "Seven days before writing this the stoppage became com- 
plete and I suffered pains such as bring men to their last day. If 
anything happens to me, do you look after the children of Metro- 
dorus for four or five years, but do not spend any more on them 
than you now spend on me." The second says: "On this truly 
happy day of my life, as I am at the point of death, I write this 
to you. The diseases in my bladder and stomach are pursuing 
their course, lacking nothing of their usual severity: but against 
all this is the joy in my heart at the recollection of my conversa- 
tions with you. Do you, as I might expect from your devotion 
from boyhood to me and to philosophy, take good care of the 
children of Metrodorus." Metrodorus, who had been one of his 
first disciples, was dead; Epicurus provided for his children in 
his will. 

Although Epicurus was gentle and kindly towards most people, 
a different side of his character appeared in his relations to philo- 
sophers, especially those to whom he might be considered in- 
debted. "I suppose," he says, "that these grumblers will believe 
me to be a disciple of The Mollusc (Nausiphanes) and to have 
listened to his teaching in company with a few bibulous youths. 
1 About five pounds. 

265 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

For indeed the fellow was a bad man and his habits such as 
could never lead to wisdom." 1 He never acknowledged the extent 
of his indebtedness to Democritus, and as for Leucippus, he 
asserted that there was no such philosopher meaning, no doubt, 
not that there was no such man, but that the man was not a 
philosopher. Diogenes Laertius gives a whole list of abusive 
epithets that he is supposed to have applied to the most eminent 
of his predecessors. With this lack of generosity towards other 
philosophers goes another grave fault, that of dictatorial dog- 
matism. His followers had to learn a kind of creed embodying 
his doctrines, which they were not allowed to question. To the 
end, none of them added or modified anything. When Lucretius, 
two hundred years later, turned the philosophy of Epicurus into 
poetry, he added, so far as can be judged, nothing theoretical to 
the master's teaching. Wherever comparison is possible, Lucretius 
is found to agree closely with the original, and it is generally 
held that, elsewhere, he may be used to fill in the gaps in our 
knowledge caused by the loss of all of Epicurus's three hundred 
books. Of his writings, nothing remains except a few letters, some 
fragments, and a statement of "Principal Doctrines." 

The philosophy of Epicurus, like all those of his age (with the 
partial exception of Scepticism), was primarily designed to secure 
tranquillity. He considered pleasure to be the good, and adhered, 
with remarkable consistency* to all the consequences of this view. 
"Pleasure," he said, "is the beginning and end of the blessed life. 
Diogenes Laertius quotes him as saying, in a book on The End of 
Life, "I know not how I can conceive the good, if I withdraw the 
pleasures of taste and withdraw the pleasures of love and those of 
hearing and sight." Again: "The beginning and the root of all 
good is the pleasure of the stomach; even wisdom and culture 
must be referred to this." The pleasure of the mind, we are told, 
is the contemplation of pleasures of the body. Its only advantage 
over bodily pleasures is that we can learn to contemplate pleasure 
rather than pain, and thus have more control over mental 
than over physical pleasures. "Virtue," unless it means "pru- 
dence in the pursuit of pleasure," is an empty name. Justice, for 
example, consists in so acting as not to have occasion to fear 
other men's resentment a view which leads to a doctrine 

1 The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers, by W. J. Gates, p. 47. Whtre 
possible, I have availed myself of Mr. Oates's translations. 

266 



THE EPICUREANS 

of the origin of society not unlike the theory of the Social 
Contract. 

Epicurus disagrees with some of his hedonist predecessors in 
distinguishing between active and passive pleasures, or dynamic 
and static pleasures. Dynamic pleasures consist in the attainment 
of a desired end, the previous desire having been accompanied 
by pain. Static pleasures consist in a state of equilibrium, which 
results from the existence of the kind of state of affairs that would 
be desired if it were absent. I think one may say that the satisfying 
of hunger, while it is in progress, is a dynamic pleasure, but the 
state of quiescence which supervenes when hunger is completely 
satisfied is a static pleasure. Of these two kinds, Epicurus holds it 
more prudent to pursue the second, since it is unalloyed, and does 
not depend upon the existence of pain as a stimulus to desire. 
When the body is in a state of equilibrium, there is no pain; we 
should, therefore, aim at equilibrium and the quiet pleasures 
rather than at more violent joys. Epicurus, it seems, would wish, 
if it were possible, to be always in the state of having eaten 
moderately, never in that of voracious desire to eat. 

He is thus led, in practice, to regarding absence of pain, rather 
than presence of pleasure, as the wise man's goal. 1 The stomach 
may be at the root of things, but the pains of stomach-ache out- 
weigh the pleasures of gluttony; accordingly Epicurus lived on 
bread, with a little cheese on feast days. Such desires as those for 
wealth and honour are futile, because they make a man restless 
when he might be contented. ' 'The greatest good of all is prudence : 
it is a more precious thing even than philosophy." Philosophy, as 
he understood it, was a practical system designed to secure a 
happy life; it required only common sense, not logic or mathe- 
matics or any of the elaborate training prescribed by Plato. He 
urges his young disciple and friend Pythodes to "flee from every 
form of culture." It was a natural consequence of his principles 
that he advised abstinence from public life, for in proportion as 
a man achieves power he increases the number of those who envy 
him and therefore wish to do him injury. Even if he escapes out- 
ward misfortune, peace of mind is impossible in such a situation. 
The wise man will try to live unnoticed, so as to have no enemies. 

Sexual love, as one of the most "dynamic 11 of pleasures, naturally 

1 (For Epicurus) "Absence of pain is in itself pleasure, indeed in his 
ultimate analvsia the truest pleasure.' 1 Bailey, op. of., p. 349. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

comes under the ban. "Sexual intercourse," the philosopher 
declares, "has never done a man good and he is lucky if it has not 
harmed him." He was fond of children (other people's), but for 
the gratification of this taste he seems to have relied upon other 
people not to follow his advice. He seems, in fact, to have liked 
children against his better judgment ; for he considered marriage 
and children a distraction from more serious pursuits. Lucretius, 
who follows him in denouncing love, sees no harm in sexual 
intercourse provided it is divorced from passion. 

The safest of social pleasures, in the opinion of Epicurus, is 
friendship. Epicurus, like Bentham, is a man who considers that 
all men, at all times, pursue only their own pleasure, sometimes 
wisely, sometimes unwisely; but, again like Bentham, he is con- 
stantly seduced by his own kindly and affectionate nature into 
admirable behaviour from which, on his own theories, he ought 
to have refrained. He obviously liked his friends without regard 
to what he got out of them, but he persuaded himself that he was 
as selfish as his philosophy held all men to be. According to 
Cicero, he held that "friendship cannot be divorced from pleasure, 
and for that reason must be cultivated, because without it neither 
can we live in safety and without fear, nor even pleasantly." 
Occasionally, however, he forgets his theories more or less: "all 
friendship is desirable in itself," he says, adding "though it starts 
from the need of help." 1 

Epicurus, though his ethic seemed to others swinish and lacking 
in moral exaltation, was very much in earnest. As we have seen, 
he speaks of the community in the garden as "our holy body"; 
he wrote a book On Holiness ; he had all the fervour of a religious 
reformer. He must have had a strong emotion of pity for the 
sufferings of mankind, and an unshakeable conviction that they 
would be greatly lessened if men would adopt his philosophy. It 
was a valetudinarian's philosophy, designed to suit a world in 
which adventurous happiness had become scarcely possible. Eat 
little, for fear of indigestion ; drink little, for fear of next morning ; 
eschew politics and love and all violently passionate activities; do 
not give hostages to fortune by marrying and having children ; in 
your mental life, teach yourself to contemplate pleasures rather 
than pains. Physical pain is certainly a great evil, but if severe, 

1 On the subject of friendship and Epicurus's amiable inconsistency, 
see Bailey, op. cit., pp. 517-20. 

268 



THE EPICUREANS 

it is brief, and if prolonged, it can be endured. by means of mental 
discipline and the habit of thinking of happy things in spite of it. 
Above all, live so as to avoid fear. 

It was through the problem of avoiding fear that Epicurus was 
led into theoretical philosophy. He held that two of the greatest 
sources of fear were religion and the dread of death, which were 
connected, since religion encouraged the view that the dead are 
unhappy. He therefore sought a metaphysic which would prove 
that the gods do not interfere in human affairs, and that the soul 
perishes with the body. Most modern people think of religion as 
a consolation, but to Epicurus it was the opposite. Supernatural 
interference with the course of nature seemed to him a source of 
terror, and immortality fatal to the hope of release from pain. 
Accordingly he constructed an elaborate doctrine designed to 
cure men of the beliefs that inspire fear. 

Epicurus was a materialist, but not a determinist. He followed 
Democritus in believing that the world consists of atoms and the 
void; but he did not believe, as Democritus did, that the atoms are 
at all times completely controlled by natural laws. The conception 
of necessity in Greece was, as we have seen, religious in origin, 
and perhaps he was right in considering that an attack on religion 
would be incomplete if it allowed necessity to survive. His atoms 
had weight, and were continually falling; not towards the centre 
of the earth, but downwards in some absolute sense. Every now 
and then, however, an atom, actuated by something like free will, 
would swerve slightly from the direct downward path, 1 and so 
would come into collision with some other atom. From this point 
onwards, the development of vortices, etc., proceeded in much the 
same way as in Democritus. The soul is material, and is composed 
of particles like those of breath and heat. (Epicurus thought 
breath and wind different in substance from air; they were not 
merely air in motion.) Soul-atoms are distributed throughout the 
body. Sensation is due to thin films thrown off by bodies and 
travelling on until they touch soul-atoms. These films may still 
exist when the bodies from which they originally proceeded have 
been dissolved; this accounts for dreams. At death, the soul is 
dispersed, and its atoms, which of course survive, are no longer 
capable of sensation, because they are no longer connected with 

1 An analogous view is urged in our day by Eddtngton, in his inter- 
pretation of the principle of indeterminacy. 

369 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the body. It follows, in the words of Epicurus, that "Death is 
nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, 
and that which lacks sensation is nothing to us." 

As for the gods, Epicurus firmly believes in their existence, 
since he cannot otherwise account for the widespread existence 
of the idea of gods. But he is persuaded that they do not trouble 
themselves with the affairs of our human world. They are rational 
hedonists, who follow his precepts, and abstain from public life; 
government would be an unnecessary labour, to which, in their 
life of complete blessedness, they feel no temptation. Of course, 
divination and augury and all such practices are purely super- 
stitious, and so is the belief in Providence. 

There is therefore no ground for the fear that we may incur the 
anger of the gods, or that we may suffer in Hades after death. 
Though subject to the powers of nature, which can be studied 
scientifically, we yet have free will, and are, within limits, the 
masters of our fate. We cannot escape death, but death, rightly 
understood, is no evil. If we live prudently, according to the 
maxims of Epicurus, we shall probably achieve a measure of 
freedom from pain. This is a moderate gospel, but to a man 
impressed with human misery it sufficed to inspire enthusiasm 

Epicurus has no interest in science on its own account ; he values 
it solely as providing naturalistic explanations of phenomena which 
superstition attributes to the agency of the gods. When there are 
several possible naturalistic explanations, he holds that there is no 
point in trying to decide between them. The phases of the moon, 
for example, have been explained in many different ways; any 
one of these, so long as it does not bring in the gods, is as good as 
any other, and it would be idle curiosity to attempt to determine 
which of them is true. It is no wonder that the Epicureans con- 
tributed practically nothing to natural knowledge. They served a 
useful purpose by their protest against the increasing devotion of 
the later pagans to magic, astrology, and divination ; but they re- 
mained, like their founder, dogmatic, limited, and without genuine 
interest in anything outside individual happiness. They learnt by 
heart the creed of Epicurus, and added nothing to it throughout 
the centuries during which the school survived. 

The only eminent disciple of Epicurus is the poet Lucretius 
(99-55 B.C.), who was a contemporary of Julius Caesar. In the 
last days of the Roman Republic, free thought was the fashion, 

270 



THE EPICUREANS 

and the doctrines of Epicurus were popular among educated 
people. The Emperor Augustus introduced an archaistic revival 
of ancient virtue and ancient religion, which caused the poem of 
Lucretius On the Nature of Things to become unpopular, and it 
remained so until the Renaissance. Only one manuscript of it 
survived die Middle Ages, and that narrowly escaped destruction 
by bigots. Hardly any great poet has had to wait so long for 
recognition, but in modern times his merits have been almost 
universally acknowledged. For example, he and Benjamin Franklin 
were Shelley's favourite authors. 

His poem sets forth in verse the philosophy of Epicurus. Al- 
though the two men have the same doctrine, their temperaments 
are very different. Lucretius was passionate, and much more in 
need of exhortations to prudence than Epicurus was. He com- 
mitted suicide, and appears to have suffered from periodic insanity 
brought on, so some averred, by the pains of love or the un- 
intended effects of a love philtre. He feels towards Epicurus as 
towards a saviour, and applies language of religious intensity to 
the man whom he regards as the destroyer of religion: 1 

When prostrate upon earth lay human life 
Visibly trampled down and foully crushed 
Beneath Religion's cruelty, who meanwhile 
Out of the regions of the heavens above 
Showed forth her face, lowering on mortal men 
With horrible aspect, first did a man of Greece 
Dare to lift up his mortal eyes against her; 
The first was he to stand up and defy her. 
Him neither stories of the gods, nor lightnings, 
Nor heaven with muttering menaces could quell, 
But all the more did they arouse his soul's 
Keen valour, till he longed to be the first 
To break through the fast-bolted doors of Nature. 
Therefore his fervent energy of mind 
Prevailed, and he passed onward, voyaging far 
Beyond the flaming ramparts of the world, 
Ranging in mind and spirit far and wide 
Throughout the unmeasured universe ; and thence 
A conqueror he returns to us, bringing back 
Knowledge both of what can and what cannot 
Rise into being, teaching us in fine 

1 1 quote the translation of Mr. R. C. Trevelyan, Book 1, 60-79. 

271 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Upon what principle each thing has its powers 
Limited, and its deep-set boundary stone. 
Therefore now has Religion been cast down 
Beneath men's feet, and trampled on in turn: 
Ourselves heaven-high his victory exalts. 

The hatred of religion expressed by Epicurus and Lucretius is 
not altogether easy to understand, if one accepts the conventional 
accounts of the cheerfulness of Greek religion and ritual. Keats 's 
Ode on a Grecian Urn, for instance, celebrates a religious ceremony, 
but not one which could fill men's minds with dark and gloomy 
terrors. I think popular beliefs were very largely not of this cheerful 
kind. The worship of the Olympians had less of superstitious 
cruelty than the other forms of Greek religion, but even the 
Olympian gods had demanded occasional human sacrifice until 
the seventh or sixth century B.C., and this practice was recorded 
in myth and drama. 1 Throughout the barbarian world, human 
sacrifice was still recognized in the time of Epicurus; until the 
Roman conquest, it was practised in times of crisis, such as the 
Punic Wars, by even the most civilized of barbarian populations. 

As was shown most convincingly by Jane Harrison, the Greeks 
had, in addition to the official cults of Zeus and his family, other 
more primitive beliefs associated with more or less barbarous rites. 
These were to some extent incorporated in Orphism, which 
became the prevalent belief among men of religious temperament. 
It is sometimes supposed that Hell was a Christian invention, but 
this is a mistake. What Christianity did in this respect was only 
to systematize earlier popular beliefs. From the beginning of Plato's 
Republic it is clear that the fear of punishment after death was 
common in fifth-century Athens, and it is not likely that it grew 
less in the interval between Socrates and Epicurus. (I am thinking 
not of the educated minority, but of the general population.) 
Certainly, also, it was common to attribute plagues, earthquakes, 
defeats in war, and such calamities, to divine displeasure or to 
failure to respect the omens. I think that Greek literature and art 
are probably very misleading as regards popular beliefs. What 
should we know of Methodism in the late eighteenth century if 
no record of the period survived except its aristocratic books and 
paintings? The influence of Methodism, like that of religiosity in 

1 Lucretius instances the sacrifice of Iphigcnia as an example of the 
harm wrought by religion. Book I, 85-100. 

272 



THE EPICUREANS 

the Hellenistic age, rose from below; it was already powerful in 
the time of Boswell and Sir Joshua Reynolds, although from their 
allusions to it the strength of its influence is not apparent. We 
must not, therefore, judge of popular religion in Greece by the 
pictures on "Grecian Urns" or by the works of poets and aristo- 
cratic philosophers. Epicurus was not aristocratic, either by birth 
or through his associates; perhaps this explains his exceptional 
hostility to religion. 

It is through the poem of Lucretius that the philosophy of Epi- 
curus has chiefly become known to readers since the Renaissance. 
What has most impressed them, when they were not professional 
philosophers, is the contrast with Christian belief in such matters 
as materialism, denial of Providence, and rejection of immortality. 
What is especially striking to a modern reader is to have these 
views which, nowadays, are generally regarded as gloomy and 
depressing presented as a gospel of liberation from the burden 
of fear. Lucretius is as firmly persuaded as any Christian of the 
importance of true belief in matters of religion. After describing 
how men seek escape from themselves when they are the victims 
of an inner conflict, and vainly seek relief in change of place, 
he says: 1 

Each man flies from his own self; 
Yet from that self in fact he has no power 
To escape: he clings to it in his own despite, 
And loathes it too, because, though he is sick, 
He perceives not the cause of his disease. 
Which if he could but comprehend aright, 
Each would put all things else aside and first 
Study to learn the nature of the world, 
Since 'tis our state during eternal time, 
Not for one hour merely, that is in doubt, 
That state wherein mortals will have to pass 
The whole time that awaits them after death. 

The age of Epicurus was a wean' age, and extinction could 
appear as a welcome rest from travail of spirit. The last age of 
the Republic, on the contrary, was not, to most Romans, a time 
of disillusionment: men of titanic energy were creating out of 
chaos a new order, which the Macedonians had failed to do. But 
to the Roman aristocrat who stood aside from politics, and cared 

1 Book III, 1068-76. I again quote Mr. R. C. Trevelyan's translation. 

273 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

nothing for the scramble for power and plunder, the course of 
events must have been profoundly discouraging. When to this 
was added the affliction of recurrent insanity, it is not to be 
wondered at that Lucretius accepted the hope of non-existence 
as a deliverance. 

But the fear of death is so deeply rooted in instinct that the 
gospel of Epicurus could not, at any time, make a wide popular 
appeal; it remained always the creed of a cultivated minority. 
Even among philosophers, after the time of Augustus, it was, as 
a rule, rejected in favour of Stoicism. It survived, it is true, though 
with diminishing vigour, for six hundred years after the death of 
Epicurus; but as men became increasingly oppressed by the 
miseries of our terrestrial existence, they demanded continually 
stronger medicine from philosophy or religion. The philosophers 
took refuge, with few exceptions, in Neoplatonism ; the uneducated 
turned to various Eastern superstitions, and then, in continually 
increasing numbers, to Christianity, which, in its early form, 
placed all good in the life beyond the grave, thus offering men a 
gospel which was the exact opposite of that of Kpicurus. Doc- 
trines very similar to his, however, were revived by the French 
philosophes at the end of the eighteenth century, and brought to 
England by Bentham and his followers; this was done in conscious 
opposition to Christianity, which these men regarded as hostilcly 
as Epicurus regarded the religions of his day. 



Chapter XXVIII 
STOICISM 

STOICISM, while in origin contemporaneous with Epicurean- 
ism, had a longer history and less constancy in doctrine. 
The teaching of its founder Zeno, in the early part of the 
third century B.C., was by no means identical with that of Marcus 
Aurelius in the latter half of the second century A.D. Zeno was a 
materialist, whose doctrines were, in the main, a combination of 
Cynicism and Heraclitus; but gradually, through an admixture 
of Platonism, the Stoics abandoned materialism, until, in the end, 
little trace of it remained. Their ethical doctrine, it is true, changed 
very little, and was what most of them regarded as of the chief 
importance. liven in this respect, however, there is some change 
of emphasis. As time goes on, continually less is said about the 
other aspects of Stoicism, and continually more exclusive stress 
is laid upon ethics and those parts of theology that are most 
relevant to ethics. With regard to all the earlier Stoics, we are 
hampered by the fact that their works survive only in a few frag- 
ments. Seneca, Kpictetus, and Marcus Aurelius, who belong to 
the first and second centuries A.D., alone survive in complete 
books. 

Stoicism is less Greek than any school of philosophy with which 
we have been hitherto concerned. The early Stoics were mostly 
Syrian, the later ones mostly Roman. Tarn (Hellenistic Civilization, 
p. 287) suspects Chaldean influences in Stoicism. Uebenveg justly 
observes that, in Hcllenizing the barbarian world, the Greeks 
dropped what only suited themselves. Stoicism, unlike the earlier 
purely Greek philosophies, is emotionally narrow, and in a certain 
sense fanatical ; but it also contains religious elements of which 
the world felt the need, and which the Greeks seemed unable to 
supply. In particular, it appealed to rulers: "nearly all the suc- 
cessors of Alexander we may say all the principal kings in 
existence in the generations following Zeno professed themselves 
Stoics," says Professor Gilbert Murray. 

Zeno was a Phoenician, born at Citium, in Cyprus, at some time 
during the latter half of the fourth century B.C. It seems probable 
that his family were engaged in commerce, and that business 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

interests were what first took him to Athens. When there, however, 
he became anxious to study philosophy. The views of the Cynics 
were more congenial to him than those of any other school, but 
he was something of an eclectic. The followers of Plato accused 
him of plagiarizing the Academy. Socrates was the chief saint of 
the Stoics throughout their history; his attitude at the time of 
his trial, his refusal to escape, his calmness in the face of death, 
and his contention that the perpetrator of injustice injures himself 
more than his victim, all fined in perfectly with Stoic teaching. 
So did his indifference to heat and cold, his plainness in matters 
of food and dress, and his complete independence of all bodily 
comforts. But the Stoics never took over Plato 1 * doctrine of ideas, 
and most of them rejected his arguments for immortality. Only 
the later Stoics followed him in regarding the soul as immaterial ; 
the earlier Stoics agreed with Heraclitus in the view that the soul 
is composed of material fire. Verbally, this doctrine is also to be 
found in Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, but it seems that in 
them the fire is not to be taken literally as one of the four elements 
of which physical things are composed. 

Zcno had no patience with metaphysical subtleties. Virtue was 
what he thought important, and he only valued physics and meta- 
physics in so far as they contributed to virtue. He attempted to 
combat the metaphysical tendencies of the age by means of 
common sense, which, in Greece, meant materialism. Doubts as 
to the trustworthiness of the senses annoyed him, and he pushed 
the opposite doctrine to extremes. 

"Zeno began by asserting the existence of the real world. 'What 
do you mean by real ?' asked the Sceptic. 'I mean solid and material. 
I mean that this table is solid matter/ 'And God/ asked the 
Sceptic, 'and the Soul?' 'Perfectly solid/ said Zeno, 'more solid, 
if anything, than the table.' 'And virtue or justice or the Rule of 
Three; also solid matter?' 4 Of course,' said Zeno, 'quite solid/ "' 

It is evident that, at this point, Zeno, like many others, was 
hurried by anti-metaphysical zeal into a metaphysic of his own. 

The main doctrines to which the school remained constant 
throughout are concerned with cosmic determinism and human 
freedom. Zeno believed that there is no such thing as chance, and 
that the course of nature is rigidly determined by natural laws. 
Originally there was only fire; then the other elements air, water. 

1 Gilbert Murray, The Stoic Philosophy (1915), P. as- 
276 



STOICISM 

earth, in that order gradually emerged. But sooner or later there 
will be a cosmic conflagration, and all will again become fire. This, 
according to most Stoics, is not a final consummation, like the 
end of the world in Christian doctrine, but only the conclusion 
of a cycle; the whole process will be repeated endlessly. Every- 
thing that happens has happened before, and will happen again, 
not once, but countless times. 

So far, the doctrine might seem cheerless, and in no respect 
more comforting than ordinary materialism such as that of Demo- 
critus. But this was only one aspect of it. The course of nature, in 
Stoicism as in eighteenth-century theology, was ordained by a 
Lawgiver who was also a beneficent Providence. Down to the 
smallest detail, the whole was designed to secure certain ends by 
natural means. These ends, except in so far as they concern gods 
and daemons, are to be found in the life of man. Everything has a 
purpose connected with human beings. Some animals are good 
to eat, some afford tests of courage; even bed bugs are useful, 
since they help us to wake in the morning and not lie in bed too 
long. The supreme Power is called sometimes God, sometimes 
Zeus. Seneca distinguished this Zeus from the object of popular 
belief, who was also real, but subordinate. 

God is not separate from the world ; He is the soul of the world, 
and each of us contains a part of the Divine Fire. All things are 
parts of one single system, which is called Nature; the individual 
life is good when it is in harmony with Nature. In one sense, every 
life is in harmony with Nature, since it is such as Nature's laws 
have caused it to be ; but in another sense a human life is only in 
harmony with Nature when the individual will is directed to ends 
which are among those of Nature. Virtue consists in a will which 
is in agreement with Nature. The wicked, though perforce they 
obey God's law, do so involuntarily; in the simile of Cleanthes, 
they are like a dog tied to a cart, and compelled to go wherever 
it goes. 

In the life of an individual man, virtue is the sole good; such 
things as health, happiness, possessions, are of no account. Since 
virtue resides in the will, everything really good or bad in a man's 
life depends only upon himself. He may become poor, but what 
of it? He can still be virtuous. A tyrant may put him in prison, 
but he can still persevere in living in harmony with Nature. He 
may be sentenced to death, but he can die nobly, like Socrates. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Other men have power only over externals; virtue, which alone 
is truly good, rests entirely with the individual. Therefore every 
man has perfect freedom, provided he emancipates himself from 
mundane desires. It is only through false judgments that such 
desires prevail; the sage whose judgments are true is master of 
his fate in all that he values, since no outside force can deprive 
him of virtue. 

There are obvious logical difficulties about this doctrine. II 
virtue is really the sole good, a beneficent Providence must be 
solely concerned to cause virtue, yet the laws of Nature have 
produced abundance of sinners. If virtue is the sole good, there 
can be no reason against cruelty and injustice, since, as the Stoics 
are never tired of pointing out, cruelty and injustice afford the 
sufferer the best opportunities for the exercise of virtue. If the 
world is completely deterministic, natural laws will decide whether 
I shall be virtuous or not. If I am wicked, Nature compels me to 
be wicked, and the freedom which virtue is supposed to give is 
not possible for me. 

To a modern mind, it is difficult to feel enthusiastic about a 
virtuous life if nothing is going to be achieved by it. We admire a 
medical man who risks his life in an epidemic of plague, because 
we think illness is an evil, and we hope to diminish its frequency. 
But if illness is no evil, the medical man might as well stay com- 
fortably at home. To the Stoic, his virtue is an end it itself, not 
something that does good. And when we take a longer view, what 
is the ultimate outcome? A destruction of the present world by 
fire, and then a repetition of the whole process. Could anything 
be more devastatingly futile? There may be progress here and 
there, for a time, but in the long run there is only recurrence. 
When we see something unbearably painful, we hope that in 
time such things will cease to happen ; but the Stoic assures us 
that what is happening now will happen over and over again. 
Providence, which sees the whole, must, one would think, ulti- 
mately grow weary through despair. 

There goes with this a certain coldness in the Stoic conception 
of virtue. Not only bad passions are condemned, but all passions. 
The $age does not feel sympathy ; when his wife or hift children 
die, he reflects that this event is no obstacle to his own virtue, 
and therefore he does not suffer deeply. Friendship, so highly 
prized by Epicurus, is all very well, but it must not be carried to 

278 



STOICISM 

the point where your friend's misfortunes can destroy your holy 
calm. As for public life, it may be your duty to engage in it, since 
it gives opportunities for justice, fortitude, and so on; but you 
must not be actuated by a desire to benefit mankind, since the 
benefits you can confer such as peace, or a more adequate supply 
of food are no true benefits, and, in any case, nothing matters 
to you except your own virtue. The Stoic is not virtuous in order 
to do good, but does good in order to be virtuous. It has not 
occurred to him to love his neighbour as himself; love, except in 
a superficial sense, is absent from his conception of virtue. 

When I say this, I am thinking of love as an emotion, not as a 
principle. As a principle, the Stoics preached universal love; this 
principle is found in Seneca and his successors, and probably was 
taken by them from earlier Stoics. The logic of the school led to 
doctrines which were softened by the humanity of its adherents, 
who were much better men than they would have been if they 
had been consistent. Kant who resembles them says that you 
must be kind to your brother, not because you are fond of him, 
but because the moral law enjoins kindness; I doubt, however, 
whether, in private life, he lived down to this precept. 

Leaving these generalities, let us come to the history of Stoicism. 

Of Zeno, 1 only some fragments remain. From these it appears 
that he defined God as the fiery mind of the world, that he said 
God was a bodily substance, and that the whole universe formed 
the substance of God; Tertullian says that, according to Zeno, 
God runs through the material world as honey runs through the 
honeycomb. According to Diogenes Lacrtius, Zeno held that the 
General Law, which is Right Reason, pervading everything, is 
the same as Zeus, the Supreme Head of the government of the 
universe: God, Mind, Destiny, Zeus, are one thing. Destiny is a 
power which moves matter; "Providence" and "Nature" are 
other names for it. Zeno does not believe that there should be 
temples to the gods: "To build temples there will be no need: for 
a temple must not be held a thing of great worth or anything holy. 
Nothing can be of great worth or holy which is the work of 
builders and mechanics." He seems, like the later Stoics, to have 
believed in astrology and divination. Cicero says that he attributed 
a divine potency to the stars. Diogenes Laertius says: "All kinds 
of divination the Stoics leave valid. There must be divination, 

1 For the source* of what follows, sec lie van, l^ter Greek Religion, p. i if. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

they say, if there is such a thing as Providence. They prove the 
reality of the art of divination by a number of cases in which 
predictions have come true, as Zeno asserts." Chrysippus is 
explicit on this subject. 

The Stoic doctrine as to virtue does not appear in the surviving 
fragments of Zeno, but seems to have been held by him. 

Cleanthes of Assos, the immediate successor of Zeno, is chiefly 
notable for two things. First: as we have already seen, he held 
that Aristarchus of Samos should be prosecuted for impiety 
because he made the sun, instead of the earth, the centre of the 
universe. The second thing is his Hymn to Zeus, much of which 
might have been written by Pope, or any educated Christian in 
the century after Newton. Even more Christian is the short 
prayer of Cleanthes: 

Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, O Destiny. 

Lead thou me on. 

To whatsoever task thou sendest me, 

Lead thou me on. 

I follow fearless, or, if in mistrust 

I lag and will not, follow still I must. 



Chrysippus (280-207 B - C w h succeeded Cleanthcs, was a 
voluminous author, and is said to have written seven hundred and 
five books. He made Stoicism systematic and pedantic. He held 
that only Zeus, the Supreme Fire, is immortal ; the other gods, 
including the sun and moon, are born and die. He is said to have 
considered that God has no share in the causation of evil, but it 
is not clear how he reconciled this with determinism. Elsewhere 
he deals with evil after the manner of Hcraclitus, maintaining that 
opposites imply one another, and good without evil is logically 
impossible: "There can be nothing more inept than the people 
who suppose that good could have existed without the existence 
of evil. Good and evil being antithetical, both must needs subsist 
in opposition. " In support of this doctrine he appeals to Plato, 
not to Heraclitus. 

Chrysippus maintained that the good man is always happy and 
the bad man unhappy, and that the good man's happiness differs 
in no way from God's. On the question whether the soul survives 
death, there were conflicting opinions. Clcanthes maintained that 
all souls survive until the next universal conflagration (when 

280 



STOICISM 

everything is absorbed into God); but Chrysippus maintained 
that this is only true of the souls of the wise. He was less exclusively 
ethical in his interests than the later Stoics ; in fact, he made logic 
fundamental. The hypothetical and disjunctive syllogism, as well 
as the word "disjunction," are due to the Stoics; so is the study 
of grammar and the invention of "cases" in declension. 1 Chry- 
sippus, or other Stoics inspired by his work, had an elaborate 
theory of knowledge, in the main empirical and based on percep- 
tion, though they allowed certain ideas and principles, which 
were held to be established by consensus gentium, the agreement 
of mankind. But Zeno, as well as the Roman Stoics, regarded all 
theoretical studies as subordinate to ethics: he says that philo- 
sophy is like an orchard, in which logic is the walls, physics the 
trees, and ethics the fruit; or like an egg, in which logic is the 
shell, physics the white, and ethics the yolk. 2 Chrysippus, it 
would seem, allowed more independent value to theoretical 
studies. Perhaps his influence accounts for the fact that among the 
Stoics there were many men who made advances in mathematics 
and other sciences. 

Stoicism, after Chrysippus, was considerably modified by two 
important men, Panaetius and Posidonius. Panaetius introduced 
a considerable element of Platonism, and abandoned materialism. 
He was a friend of the younger Scipio, and had an influence on 
Cicero, through whom, mainly, Stoicism became known to the 
Romans. Posidonius, under whom Cicero studied in Rhodes, 
influenced him even more. Posidonius was taught by Panaetius, 
who died about 1 10 B.C. 

Posidonius (ra, 135-01. 51 B.C.) was a Syrian Greek, and was a 
child when the Seleucid empire came to an end. Perhaps it was 
his experience of anarchy in Syria that caused him to travel west- 
ward, first to Athens, where he imbibed the Stoic philosophy, 
and then further afield, to the western parts of the Roman Empire. 
44 He saw with his own eyes the sunset in the Atlantic beyond the 
verge of the known world, and the African coast over against 
Spain, where the trees were full of apes, and the villages of bar- 
barous people inland from * Marseilles, where human heads 
hanging at the house-doors for trophies were an every-day sight."* 
He became a voluminous writer on scientific subjects; indeed, 

1 See Berth, Die Stoa, 4th edition, Stuttgart, 1922. 

1 Ibid. ' Bcvan, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 88. 

28l 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

one of the reasons for his travels was a wish to study the tides, 
which could not be done in the Mediterranean. He did excellent 
work in astronomy; as we saw in Chapter XXIV his estimate of 
the distance of the sun was the best in antiquity. 1 He was also a 
historian of note he continued Polybius. But it was chiefly as 
an eclectic philosopher that he was known: he combined with 
Stoicism much of Plato's teaching, which the Academy, in its 
sceptical phase, appeared to have forgotten. 

This affinity to Plato is shown in his teaching about the soul 
and the life after death. Panaetius had said, as most Stoics did, 
that the soul perishes with the body. Posidonius, on the contrary, 
says that it continues to live in the air, where, in most cases, it 
remains unchanged until the next world-conflagration. There is 
no hell, but the wicked, after death, are not so fortunate as the 
good, for sin makes the vapours of the soul muddy, and prevents 
it from rising as far as the good soul rises. The very wicked stay 
near the earth and are reincarnated ; the truly virtuous rise to the 
stellar sphere and spend their time watching the stars go round. 
They can help other souls; this explains (he thinks) the truth of 
astrology. Bevan suggests that, by this revival of Orphic notions 
and incorporation of Neo-Pythagorean beliefs, Posidonius may 
have paved the way for Gnosticism. He adds, very truly, that 
what was fatal to such philosophies as his was not Christianity 
but the Coperrucan theory. 1 Cleanthes was right in regarding 
Aristarchus of Samos as a dangerous enemy. 

Much more important historically (though not philosophically) 
than the earlier Stoics were the three who were connected with 
Rome: Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius a minister, a 
slave, and an emperor, respectively. 

Seneca (ca. 3 B.C. to A.D. 65) was a Spaniard, whose father was 
a cultivated man living in Rome. Seneca adopted a political career, 
and was being moderately successful when he was banished to 
Corsica (A.D. 41) by the Emperor Claudius, because he had 
incurred the enmity of the Empress Messalina. Claudius's second 
wife Agrippina recalled Seneca from exile in A.D. 48, and appointed 

1 He estimated that by sailing westward from Cadiz, India could be 
teached after 70,000 stades. "This remark was the ultimate foundation 
of Columbia's confidence." Tarn, Hellenistic Civilization, p. 249. 

1 The above account of Posidonius is mainly based on Chapter II I of 
Edwyn Be van's Stoic t and Sceptic*. 

282 



STOICISM 

him tutor to her son, aged eleven. Seneca was less fortunate than 
Aristotle in his pupil, who was the Emperor Nero. Although, as a 
Stoic, Seneca officially despised riches, he amassed a huge fortune, 
amounting, it was said, to three hundred million sesterces (about 
three million pounds). Much of this he acquired by lending 
money in Britain ; according to Dio, the excessive rates of interest 
that he exacted were among the causes of revolt in that country. 
The heroic Queen Boadicea, if this is true, was heading a rebellion 
against capitalism as represented by the philosophic apostle of 
austerity. 

Gradually, as Nero's excesses grew more unbridled, Seneca fell 
increasingly out of favour. At length he \vas accused, justly or 
unjustly, of complicity in a widespread conspiracy to murder 
Nero and place a new emperor some said, Seneca himself 
upon the throne. In view of his former services, he was graciously 
permitted to commit suicide (A.D. 65). 

His end was edifying. At first, on being informed of the Em- 
peror's decision, he set about making a will. When told that there 
was no time allowed for such a lengthy business, he turned to his 
sorrowing family and said: "Never mind, I leave you what is of 
far more value than earthly riches, the example of a virtuous life" 
or words to that effect. lie then opened his veins, and summoned 
his secretaries to take down his dying words; according to Tacitus, 
his eloquence continued to flow during his last moments. His 
nephew Lucan, the poet, suffered a similar death at the same time, 
and expired reciting his own verses. Seneca was judged, in future 
ages, rather hy his admirable precepts than by his somewhat 
dubious practice. Several of the Fathers claimed him as a Christian, 
and a supposed correspondence between him and Saint Paul was 
accepted as genuine by such men as Saint Jerome. 

Epictetus (born about A.D. 60, died about A.D. 100) is a very 
different type of man, though closely akin as a philosopher. He 
was a Greek, originally a slave of Epaphroditus, a freedman of 
Nero and then his minister. He was lame as a result, it was said 
of a cruel punishment in his days of slavery. He lived and taught 
at Rome until A.D. 90, when the Emperor Domitian, who had no 
use for intellectuals, banished all philosophers. Epictetus there- 
upon retired to lS ? icopolis in Epirus, where, after some years 
spent in writing and teaching, he died. 

Marcus Aurrlius (A.D. 121-180) was at the other end of the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

social scale. He was the adopted son of the good Emperor Anto- 
ninus Pius, who was his uncle and his father-in-law, whom he 
succeeded in A.D. 161, and whose memory he revered. As Emperor, 
he devoted himself to Stoic virtue. He had much need of fortitude, 
for his reign was beset by calamities earthquakes, pestilences, 
long and difficult wars, military insurrections. His Meditations, 
which are addressed to himself, and apparently not intended for 
publication, show that he felt his public duties burdensome, and 
that he suffered from a great weariness. His only son Commodus, 
who succeeded him, turned out to be one of the worst of the 
many bad emperors, but successfully concealed his vicious pro- 
pensities so long as his father lived. The philosopher's wife 
Faustina was accused, perhaps unjustly, of gross immorality, but 
he never suspected her, and after her death took trouble about 
her deification. He persecuted the Christians, because they re- 
jected the State religion, which he considered politically necessary. 
In all his actions he was conscientious, but in most he was un- 
successful. He is a pathetic figure: in a list of mundane desires to 
be resisted, the one that he finds most seductive is the wish to 
retire to a quiet country life. For this, the opportunity never 
came. Some of his Meditations are dated from the camp, on 
distant campaigns, the hardships of which eventually caused his 
death. 

It is remarkable that Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius are com- 
pletely at one on all philosophical questions. This suggests that 
although social circumstances affect the philosophy of an age, 
individual circumstances have less influence than is sometimes 
thought upon the philosophy of an individual. Philosophers are 
usually men with a certain breadth of mind, who can largely dis- 
count the accidents of their private lives; but even they cannot 
rise above the larger good or evil of their time. In bad times they 
invent consolations ; in good times their interests are more purely 
intellectual. 

Gibbon, whose detailed history begins with the vices of Corn- 
modus, agrees with most eighteenth-century writers in regarding 
the period of the Amonines as a golden age. "If a man were called 
upon/' be says, "to fix the period in the history of the world, 
during which the condition of the human race was most happy 
and prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that which 
elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of Com- 



STOICISM 


modus." It is impossible to agree altogether with this judgment. 
The evil of slavery involved immense suffering, and was sapping 
the vigour of the ancient world. There were gladiatorial shows 
and fights with wild beasts, which were intolerably cruel and 
must have debased the populations that enjoyed the spectacle. 
Marcus Aurelius, it is true, decreed that gladiators should fight 
with blunted swords ; but this reform was short-lived, and he did 
nothing about fights with wild beasts. The economic system was 
very bad; Italy was going out of cultivation, and the population 
of Rome depended upon the free distribution of grain from the 
provinces. All initiative was concentrated in the Emperor and his 
ministers; throughout the vast extent of the Empire, no one. 
except an occasional rebellious general, could do anything but 
submit. Men looked to the past for what was best; the future, 
they felt, would be at best a weariness, and at worst a horror. 
When we compare the tone of Marcus Aurelius with that of 
Bacon, or Ixrcke, or Condorcet, we see the difference between a 
tired and a hopeful age. In a hopeful age, great present evils can 
be endured, because it is thought that they will pass; but in a 
tired ape even real poods lose their savour. The Stoic ethic suited 
the times of Kpictettis and Marcus Aurelius, because its gospel 
was one of endurance rather than hope. 

Undoubtedly the ape of the Antonines was much better than 
any later ape until the Renaissance, from the point of view of the 
general happiness. Rut careful study shows that it was not so 
prosperous as its architectural remains would lead one to suppose. 
Graeco- Roman civilization had made very little impression on 
the agricultural regions; it was practically limited to the cities. 
Even in the cities, there was a proletariat which suffered very 
great poverty, and there was a large slave class. Rostovtseff sums 
up a discussion of social and economic conditions in the cities 
as follows: 1 

"This picture of their social conditions is not so attractive as 
the picture of their external appearance. The impression conveyed 
by our sources is that the splendour of the cities was created by, 
and existed for, a rather small minority of their population ; that 
the welfare even of this small minority was based on comparatively 
weak foundations; that the large masses of the city population 

1 Roftovtacff, The Social and Economic History qf the Roman Empire. 
P. 17J>. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

had either a very moderate income or lived in extreme poverty. 
In a word, we must not exaggerate the health of the cities: their 
external aspect is misleading." 

On earth, says Epictetus, we are prisoners, and in an earthly 
body. According to Marcus Aurelius, he used to say "Thou art 
a little soul bearing about a corpse." Zeus could not make the 
body free, but he gave us a portion of his divinity. God is the 
father of men, and we are all brothers. We should not say "I am 
an Athenian" or "I am a Roman," but "I am a citizen of the 
universe." If you were a kinsman of Caesar, you would feel safe; 
how much more should you feel safe in being a kinsman of God ? 
If we understand that virtue is the only true good, we shall see 
that no real evil can befall us. 

I must die. But must I die groaning? I must be imprisoned. But 
must I whine as well ? I must suffer exile. Can any one then hinder 
me from going with a smile, and a good courage, and at peace? 
"Tell the secret." I refuse to tell, for this is in my power. "But I 
will chain you." What say you, fellow? Chain me? My leg you 
will chain yes, but my will no, not even Zeus can conquer that. 
"I will imprison you." My bit of a body, you mean. "I will behead 
you." Why? When did I ever tell you that I was the only man in 
the world that could not be beheaded ? 

These are the thoughts that those who pursue philosophy 
should ponder, these are the lessons they should write down day 
by day, in these they should exercise themselves. 1 

Slaves are the equals of other men, because all alike arc sons 
of God. 

We must submit to Cod as a good citizen submits to the law. 
"The soldier swears to respect no man above Caesar, but we to 
respect ourselves first of all." 2 "When you appear before the 
mighty of the earth, remember that Another looks from above 
on what is happening, and that you must please Him rather than 
this man." 3 

Who then is a Stoic ? 

Show me a man moulded to the pattern of the judgments that 
he utters, in the same way as we call a statue Phidian that is 
moulded according to the art of Phidias. Show me one who is 
sick and yet happy, in peril and yet happy, dying and yet happy, 

1 Quoted from Gates, op. rtf., pp. 225-6, 

1 //., p. 251. IUd. 9 p. 280. 

286 



STOICISM 

in exile and happy, in disgrace and happy. Show him me. By the 
gods I would fain see a Stoic. Nay you cannot show me a finished 
Stoic; then show me one in the moulding, one who has set his 
feet on the path. Do me this kindness, do not grudge an old man 
like me a sight I never 'saw till now. What! You think you are 
going to show me the Zeus of Phidias or his Athena, that work of 
ivory and gold? It is a soul I want; let one of you show me the 
soul of a man who wishes to be at one with God, and to blame 
God or man no longer, to fail in nothing, to feel no misfortune, 
to be free from anger, envy, and jealousy one who (why wrap 
up my meaning?) desires to change his manhood for godhead, 
and who in this poor body of his has his purpose set upon com- 
munion with God. Show him to me. Nay, you cannot. 

Epictctus is never weary of showing how we should deal with 
what are considered misfortunes, which he does often by means 
of homely dialogues. 

Like the Christians, he holds that we should love our enemies. 
In general, in common with other Stoics, he despises pleasure, 
but there is a kind of happiness that is noi to be despised. "Athens 
is beautiful. Yes, but happiness is far more beautiful freedom 
from passion and disturbance, the sense that your affairs depend 
on no one" (p. 428). Every man is an actor in a play, in which 
God has assigned the parts; it is our duty to perform our part 
worthily, whatever it may be. 

There is great sincerity and simplicity in the writings which 
record the teaching of Kpictetus. (They are written down from 
notes by his pupil Arrian.) His morality is lofty and unworldly; 
in a situation in which a man's main duty is to resist tyrannical 
power, it would be difficult to find anything more helpful. In 
some respects, for instance in recognizing the brotherhood of 
nian and in teaching the equality of slaves, it is superior to any- 
thing to be found in Plato or Aristotle or any philosopher whose 
thought is inspired by the City State. The actual world, in the 
time of Epictctus, was very inferior to the Athens of Pericles; 
but the evil in what existed liberated his aspirations, and his 
ideal world is a* superior to that of Plato as his actual world is 
inferior to the Athens of the fifth century. 

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius begin by acknowledging 
his indebtedness to his grandfather, father, adopted father, various 
teachers, and the gods. Some of the obligations he enumerates are 

287 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

curious. He learned (he says) from Diognetus not to listen to 
miracle- workers; from Rusticus, not to write poetry; from Sextus, 
to practise gravity without affectation; from Alexander the 
grammarian, not to correct bad grammar in others, but to use 
the right expression shortly afterwards; from Alexander the 
Platonist, not to excuse tardiness in answering a letter by the 
plea of press of business; from his adopted father, not to fall in 
love with boys. He owes it to the gods (he continues) that he was 
not brought up too long with his grandfather's concubine, and 
did not make proof of his virility too soon ; that his children are 
neither stupid nor deformed in body; that his wife is obedient, 
affectionate, and simple ; and that when he took to philosophy he 
did not waste time on history, syllogism, or astronomy. 

What is impersonal in the Meditations agrees closely with 
Epictetus. Marcus Aurelius is doubtful about immortality, but 
says, as a Christian might: "Since it is possible that thou mayst 
depart from life this very moment, regulate every act and thought 
accordingly." Life in harmony with the universe is what is good; 
and harmony with the universe is the same thing as obedience 
to the will of God. 

"Everything harmonizes with me which is harmonious to thec, 
O Universe. Nothing for me is too early or too late, which is in 
due time for thee. Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons 
bring, O Nature: from thec are ail things, in thee are all things, 
to thee all things return. The poet says, Dear city of Cecrops; and 
wilt not thou say, Dear city of Zeus?" 

One sees that Saint Augustine's City of God was in part taken 
over from the pagan Emperor. 

Marcus Aureiius is persuaded that God gives every man a 
special daemon as his guide a belief which reappears in the 
Christian guardian angel. He finds comfort in the thought of the 
universe as a closely-knit whole; it is, he says, one living being, 
having one substance and one soul. One of his maxims is: "Fre- 
quently consider the connection of all things in the universe." 
"Whatever may happen to thee, it was prepared for thee from all 
eternity; and the implication of causes was from eternity spinning 
the thread of thy being/' There goes with this, in spite of his 
position in the Roman State, the Stoic belief in the human race 
as one community : "My city and country, so far as 1 am Antoninus, 
it Rome, but so far as I am a man, it is the world." There is the 

288 



STOICISM 

difficulty that one finds in all Stoics, of reconciling determinism 
with the freedom of the will. "Men exist for the sake of one 
another," he says, when he is thinking of his duty as ruler. "The 
wickedness of one man does no harm to another," he says on 
the same page, when he is thinking of the doctrine that the virtuous 
will alone is good. He never inferred that the goodness of one 
man does no good to another, and that he would do no harm to 
anybody but himself if he were as bad an Emperor as Nero; and 
yet this conclusion seems to follow. 

"It is peculiar to man," he says, "to love even those who do 
wrong. And this happens if, when they do wrong, it occurs to 
thee that they are kinsmen, and that they do wrong through 
ignorance and unintentionally, and that soon both of you will die; 
and above all, that the wrong-doer has done thee no harm, foi 
he has not made thy ruling faculty worse than it was before." 

And again: "Love mankind, Follow God. . . . And it is 
enough to remember that Law rules all." 

These passages bring out very clearly the inherent contradictions 
in Stoic ethics arid theology. On the one hand, the universe is a 
rigidly deterministic single whole, in which all that happens is 
the result of previous causes. On the other hand, the individual 
will is completely autonomous, and no man can be forced to sin 
by outside causes. This is one contradiction and there is a second 
closely connected with it. Since the will is autonomous, and the 
virtuous will alone is good, one man cannot do either good or 
harm to another; therefore benevolence is an illusion. Something 
must be said about each of these contradictions. 

The contradiction between free will and determinism is one of 
those that run through philosophy from early times to our own 
day, taking different forms at different times. At present it is the 
Stoic form that concerns us. 

I think that a Stoic, if we could make him submit to a Socratic 
interrogation, would defend his view more or less as follows: The 
universe is a single animate Being, having a soul which may also 
be called God or Reason. As a whole, this Being is free. God 
decided, from the first, that He would act according to fixed 
general laws, but He chose such laws as would have the best 
results. Sometimes, in particular cases, the results are not wholly 
desirable, but this inconvenience is worth enduring, as in human 
codes of law, for the sake of the advantage of legislative fixity. A 

> ti f M'/ur* /'JMliOoffty 289 K 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

human being is partly fire, partly of lower clay ; in so far as he is 
fire (at any rate when it is of the best quality), he is part of God. 
When the divine part of a man exercises will virtuously, this will 
is part of God's, which is free; therefore in these circumstances 
the human will also is free. 

This is a good answer up to a point, but it breaks down when 

we consider the causes of our volitions. We all know, as a matter 

of empirical fact, that dyspepsia, for example, has a bad effect on 

a man's virtue, and that, by suitable drugs forcibly administered, 

will-power can be destroyed. Take Epictetus's favourite case, 

the man unjustly imprisoned by a tyrant, of which there have 

been more examples in recent years than at any other period in 

human history. Some of these men have acted with Stoic heroism ; 

some, rather mysteriously, have not. It has become clear, not 

only that sufficient torture will break down almost any man's 

fortitude, but also that morphia or cocaine can reduce a man to 

docility. The will, in fact, is only independent of the tyrant so 

long as the tyrant is unscientific. This is an extreme example; 

but the same arguments that exist in favour of determinism in the 

inanimate world exist also in the sphere of human volitions in 

general. I do not say I do not think that these arguments are 

conclusive; I say only that they are of equal strength in both cases, 

and that there can be no good reason for accepting them in one 

region and rejecting them in another. The Stoic, when he is 

engaged in urging a tolerant attitude to sinners, will himself urge 

that the sinful will is a result of previous causes ; it is only the 

virtuous will that seems to him free. This, however, is inconsistent. 

Marcus Aurelius explains his own virtue as due to the good 

influence of parents, grandparents, and teachers; the good will is 

just as much a result of previous causes as the bad will. The 

Stoic may say truly that his philosophy is a cause of virtue in 

those who adopt it, but it seems that it will not have this desirable 

effect unless there is a certain admixture of intellectual error. 

The realization that virtue and sin alike are the inevitable result 

of previous causes (as the Stoics should have held) is likely to 

have a somewhat paralysing effect on moral effort. 

I come now to the second contradiction, that the Stoic, while he 
preached benevolence, held, in theory, that no man can do either 
good or harm to another, since the virtuous will alone is good, and 
the virtuous will is independent of outside causes. This contra- 

290 



STOICISM 

diction is more patent than the other, and more peculiar to the 
Stoics (including certain Christian moralists). The explanation of 
their not noticing it is that, like many other people, they had two 
systems of ethics, a superfine one for themselves, and an inferior 
one for "the lesser breeds without the law." When the Stoic 
philosopher is thinking of himself, he holds that happiness and 
all other worldly so-called goods are worthless; he even says that 
to desire happiness is contrary to nature, meaning that it involves 
lack of resignation to the will of God. But as a practical man 
administering the Roman Empire, Marcus Aurelius knows per- 
fectly well that this son of thing won't do. It is his duty to see 
that the grain-ships from Africa duly reach Rome, that measures 
are taken to relieve the sufferings caused by pestilence, and that 
barbarian enemies are not allowed to cross the frontier. That is 
to say, in dealing with those of his subjects whom he does not 
regard as Stoic philosophers, actual or potential, he accepts 
ordinary mundane standards of what is good or bad. It is by 
applying these standards that he arrives at his duty as an adminis- 
trator. What is odd is that this duty, itself, is in the higher sphere 
of what the Stoic sage should do, although it is deduced from an 
ethic which the Stoic sage regards as fundamentally mistaken. 

The only reply that I can imagine to this difficulty is one which 
is perhaps logically unassailable, but is not very plausible. It 
would, I think, be given by Kant, whose ethical system is very 
similar to that of the Stoics. True, he might say, there is nothing 
good but the good will, but the will is good when it is directed 
to certain ends, that, in themselves, are indifferent. It does not 
matter whether Mr. A is happy or unhappy, but I, if I am virtuous, 
shall act in a way which I believe will make him happy, because 
that is what the moral law enjoins. I cannot make Mr. A virtuous, 
because his virtue depends only upon himself; but I can do some- 
thing towards making him happy, or rich, or learned, or healthy. 
The Stoic ethic may therefore be stated as follows: Certain things 
are vulgarly considered goods, but this is a mistake; what is good 
is a will directed towards securing these false goods for other people. 
This doctrine involves no logical contradiction, but it loses all 
plausibility if we genuinely believe that what are commonly con- 
sidered goods are worthless, for in that case the virtuous will 
might just as well be directed to quite other ends. 

There is, in fact, an element of sour grapes in Stoicism. We 

291 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

can't be happy, but we can be good; let us therefore pretend that, 
so long as we are good, it doesn't matter being unhappy. This 
doctrine is heroic, and, in a bad world, useful; but it is neither 
quite true nor, in a fundamental sense, quite sincere. 

Although the main importance of the Stoics was ethical, there 
were two respects in which their teaching bore fruit in other fields. 
One of these is theory of knowledge ; the other is the doctrine of 
natural law and natural rights. 

In theory of knowledge, in spite of Plato, they accepted percep- 
tion; the deceptiveness of the senses, they held, was really false 
judgment, and could be avoided by a little care. A Stoic philo- 
sopher, Sphaerus, an immediate disciple of Zcno, was once invited 
to dinner by King Ptolemy, who, having heard of this doctrine, 
offered him a pomegranate made of wax. The philosopher pro- 
ceeded to try to eat it, whereupon the king laughed at him. He 
replied that he had felt no certainty of its being a real pomegranate, 
but had thought it unlikely that anything inedible would be 
supplied at the royal table. 1 In this answer he appealed to a Stoic 
distinction, between those things which can be known with 
certainty on the basis of perception, and those which, on this 
basis, are only probable. On the whole, this doctrine was sane and 
scientific. 

Another doctrine of theirs in theory of knowledge was more 
influential, though more questionable. This was their belief in 
innate ideas and principles. Greek logic was wholly deductive, 
and this raised the question of first premisses. First premisses had 
to be, at least in part, general, and no method existed of proving 
them. The Stoics held that there are certain principles which are 
luminously obvious, and are admitted by all men ; these could be 
made, as in Euclid's Elements, the basis of deduction. Innate ideas, 
similarly, could be used as the starting-point of definitions. This 
point of view was accepted throughout the Middle Ages, and 
even by Descartes. 

The doctrine of natural right, as it appears in the sixteenth, 
seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, is a revival of a Stoic 
doctrine, though with important modifications. It was the Stoics 
who distinguished jus naturale from jut gentium. Natural law was 
derived from first principles of the kind held to underlie all 
general knowledge. By nature, the Stoics held, all human beings 
1 Diogenet Laertnu, Vol. VII ,177. 
292 



STOICISM 

are equal. Marcus Aurelius, in his Meditations, favours "a polity 
in which there is the same law for all, a polity administered with 
regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and a kingly 
government which respects most of all the freedom of the 
governed.*' This was an ideal which could not be consistently 
realized in the Roman Empire, but it influenced legislation, partic- 
ularly in improving the status of women and slaves. Christianity 
took over this part of Stoic teaching along with much of the rest. 
And when at last, in the seventeenth century, the opportunity 
came to combat despotism effectually, the Stoic doctrines of 
natural law and natural equality, in their Christian dress, acquired 
a practical force which, in antiquity, not even an emperor could 
to them. 



Chapter XXIX 

THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION 
TO CULTURE 

f IHE Roman Empire affected the history of culture in various 

I more or less separate ways. 

JL First: there is the direct effect of Rome on Hellenistic 
thought. This is not very important or profound. 

Second: the effect of Greece and the East on the western half 
of the empire. This was profound and lasting, since it included 
the Christian religion. 

Third: the importance of the long Roman peace in diffusing 
culture and in accustoming men to the idea of a single civilization 
associated with a single government. 

Fourth: the transmission of Hellenistic civilization to the 
Mohammedans, and thence ultimately to western Europe. 

Before considering these influences of Rome, a very brief 
synopsis of the political history will be useful. 

Alexander's conquests had left the western Mediterranean un- 
touched ; it was dominated, at the beginning of the third century 
B.C., by two powerful City States, Carthage and Syracuse. In the 
first and second Punic Wars (264-241 and 218-201), Rome con- 
quered Syracuse and reduced Carthage to insignificance. During 
the second century, Rome conquered the Macedonian monarchies 
Egypt, it is true, lingered on as a vassal state until the death of 
Cleopatra (30 B.C.). Spain was conquered as an incident in the 
war with Hannibal; France was conquered by Caesar in the 
middle of the first century B.C., and England was conquered 
about a hundred years later. The frontiers of the Empire, in its 
great days, were the Rhine and Danube in Europe, the Euphrates 
in Asia, and the desert in North Africa. 

Roman imperialism was, perhaps, at its best in North Africa 
(important in Christian history as the home of Saint Cyprian and 
Saint Augustine), where large areas, uncultivated before and after 
Roman times, were rendered fertile and supported populous cities. 
The Roman Empire was on the whole stable and peaceful for 
over two hundred years, from the accession of Augustus (30 B.C.) 
until the disasters of the third century. 

294 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

Meanwhile the constitution of the Roman State had undergone 
important developments. Originally, Rome was a small City 
State, not very unlike those of Greece, especially such as, like 
Sparta, did not depend upon foreign commerce. Kings, like those 
of Homeric Greece, had been succeeded by an aristocratic republic. 
Gradually, while the aristocratic element, embodied in the Senate, 
remained powerful, democratic elements were added ; the resulting 
compromise was regarded by Panaetius the Stoic (whose views 
are reproduced by Polybius and Cicero) as an ideal combination 
of monarchical, aristocratic, and democratic elements. But con- 
quest upset the precarious balance; it brought immense new 
wealth to the senatorial class, and, in a slightly lesser degree, to 
the "knights," as the upper middle class were called. Italian 
agriculture, which had been in the hands of small farmers growing 
grain by their own labour and that of their families, came to be a 
matter of huge estates belonging to the Roman aristocracy, where 
vines and olives were cultivated by slave labour. The result was 
the virtual omnipotence of the Senate, which was used shamelessly 
for the enrichment of individuals, without regard for the interests 
of the State or the welfare of its subjects. 

A democratic movement, inaugurated by the Gracchi in the 
latter half of the second century B.C., led to a series of civil wars, 
and finally as so often in Greece to the establishment of a 
4 'tyranny." It is curious to see the repetition, on such a vast scale, 
of developments which, in Greece, had been confined to minute 
areas. Augustus, the heir and adopted son of Julius Caesar, who 
reigned from 30 B.C. to A.D. 14, put an end to civil strife, and (with 
few exceptions) to external wars of conquest. For the first time 
since the beginnings of Greek civilization, the ancient world 
enjoyed peace and security. 

Two things had ruined the Greek political system: first, the 
claim of each city to absolute sovereignty; second, the bitter and 
bloody strife between rich and poor within most cities. After the 
conquest of Carthage and the Hellenistic kingdoms, the first of 
these causes no longer afflicted the world, since no effective 
resistance to Rome was possible. But the second cause remained. 
In the civil wars, one general would proclaim himself the champion 
of the Senate, the other of the people. Victory went to the one 
who offered the highest rewards to the soldiers. The soldiers 
wanted not only pay and plunder, but grants of land; therefore 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

each civil war ended in the formally legal expulsion of many 
existing landholders, who were nominally tenants of the State, to 
make room for the legionaries of the victor. The expenses of the 
war, while in progress, were defrayed by executing rich men and 
confiscating their property. This system, disastrous as it was, 
could not easily be ended ; at last, to every one's surprise, Augustus 
was so completely victorious that no competitor remained to 
challenge his claim to power. 

To the Roman world, the discovery that the period of civil 
war was ended came as a surprise, which was a cause of rejoicing 
to all except a small senatorial party. To every one else, it was a 
profound relief when Rome, under Augustus, at last achieved the 
stability and order which Greeks and Macedonians had sought in 
vain, and which Rome, before Augustus, had also failed to pro- 
duce. In Greece, according to Rostovtseff, republican Rome had 
"introduced nothing new, except pauperization, bankruptcy, and 
a stoppage of all independent political activity/' 1 

The reign of Augustus was a period of happiness for the Roman 
Empire. The administration of the provinces was at last organized 
with some regard to the welfare of the population, and not on a 
purely predatory system. Augustus was not only officially deified 
after his death, but was spontaneously regarded as a god in various 
provincial cities. Poets praised him, the commercial classes found 
the universal peace convenient, and even the Senate, which he 
treated with all the outward forms of respect, lost no opportunity 
of heaping honours and offices on his head. 

But although the world was happy, some savour had gone out 
of life, since safety had been preferred to adventure. In early times, 
every free Greek had had the opportunity of adventure; Philip 
and Alexander put an end to this state of affairs, and in the 
Hellenistic world only Macedonian dynasts enjoyed anarchic 
freedom. The Greek world lost its youth, and became either 
cynical or religious. The hope of embodying ideals in earthly 
institutions faded, and with it the best men lost their zest. Heaven, 
for Socrates, was a place where he could go on arguing; for 
philosophers after Alexander, it was something more different 
from their existence here below. 

In Rome, a similar development came later, and in a less painful 
form. Rome was not conquered, as Greece was, but had, on the 
1 History of th* Ancient World. Vol. II, p. 255. 
2Q6 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

contrary, the stimulus of successful imperialism. Throughout the 
period of the civil wars, it was Romans who were responsible for 
the disorders. The Greeks had not secured peace and order by 
submitting to the Macedonians, whereas both Greeks and Romans 
secured both by submitting to Augustus. Augustus was a Roman, 
to whom most Romans submitted willingly, not only on account 
of his superior power; moreover he took pains to disguise the 
military origin of his government, and to base it upon decrees of 
the Senate. The adulation expressed by the Senate was, no doubt, 
largely insincere, but outside the senatorial class no one felt 
humiliated. 

The mood of the Romans was like that of zjeune homtne range 
in nineteenth-century France, who, after a life of amatory ad- 
venture, settles down to a marriage of reason. This mood, though 
contented, is not creative. The great poets of the Augustan age 
had been formed in more troubled times; Horace fled at Philippi, 
and both he and Virgil lost their farms in confiscations for the 
benefit of victorious soldiers. Augustus, for the sake of stability, 
set to work, somewhat insincerely, to restore ancient piety, and 
was therefore necessarily rather hostile to free inquiry. The 
Roman world began to become stereotyped, and the process 
continued under later emperors. 

The immediate successors of Augustus indulged in appalling 
cruelties towards Senators and towards possible competitors for 
the purple. To some extent, the misgovernment of this period 
extended to the provinces; but in the main the administrative 
machine created by Augustus continued to function fairly well. 

A better period began with the accession of Trajan in A.D, 98, 
and continued until the death of Marcus Aurelius in A.D. 180. 
During this time, the government of the Empire was as good as 
any despotic government can be. The third century, on the con- 
trary, was one of appalling disaster. The army realized its power, 
made and unmade emperors in return for cash and the promise 
of a life without warfare, and ceased, in consequence, to be an 
effective fighting force. The barbarians, from north and east, 
invaded and plundered Roman territory. The army, preoccupied 
with private gain and civil discord, was incompetent in defence. 
The whole fiscal system broke down, since there was an immense 
diminution of resources and, at the same time, a vast increase of 
expenditure in unsuccessful war and in bribery of the army. 

297 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Pestilence, in addition to war, greatly diminished the population. 
It seemed as if the Empire was about to fall. 

This result was averted by two energetic men, Diocletian (A.D. 

286-305) and Constantine, whose undisputed reign lasted from 

A.D. 312 to 337. By them the Empire was divided into an eastern 

and western half, corresponding, approximately, to the division 

between the Greek and Latin languages. By Constantine the 

capital of the eastern half was established at Byzantium, to which 

he gave the new name of Constantinople. Diocletian curbed the 

army, for a while, by altering its character ; from his time onwards, 

the most effective fighting forces were composed of barbarians, 

chiefly German, to whom all the highest commands were open. 

This was obviously a dangerous expedient, and early in the fifth 

century it bore its natural fruit. The barbarians decided that it 

was more profitable to fight for themselves than for a Roman 

master. Nevertheless it served its purpose for over a century. 

Diocletian's administrative reforms were equally successful for a 

time, and equally disastrous in the long run. The Roman system 

was to allow local self-government to the towns, and to leave 

their officials to collect the taxes, of which only the total amount 

due from any one town was fixed by the centra) authorities. 

This system had worked well enough in prosperous times, but 

now, in the exhausted state of the empire, the revenue demanded 

was more than could be borne without excessive hardship. The 

municipal authorities were personally responsible for the taxes, 

and fled to escape payment. Diocletian compelled well-to-do 

citizens to accept municipal office, and made flight illegal. From 

similar motives he turned the rural population into serfs, tied to 

the soil and forbidden to migrate. This system was kept on by 

later emperors. 

Constantine's most important innovation was the adoption of 
Christianity as the State religion, apparently because a large 
proportion of the soldiers were Christian. 1 The result of this was 
that when, during the fifth century, the Germans destroyed the 
Western Empire, its prestige caused them to adopt the Christian 
religion, thereby preserving for western Europe so much of 
ancient civilization as had been absorbed by the Church. 

The development of the territory assigned to the eastern half 
of the Empire was different. The Eastern Empire, though con- 

1 Sec Rottovtteff, Hittorv of the Ancient World, Vol. II, p. 332. 

298 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

tinually diminishing in extent (except for the transient conquests 
of Justinian in the sixth century), survived until 1453, when 
Constantinople was conquered by the Turks. But most of what 
had been Roman provinces in the east, including also Africa and 
Spain in the west, became Mohammedan. The Arabs, unlike the 
Germans, rejected the religion, but adopted the civilization, of 
those whom they had conquered. The Eastern Empire was Greek, 
not Latin, in its civilization; accordingly, from the seventh to the 
eleventh centuries, it was it and the Arabs who preserved Greek 
literature and whatever survived of Greek, as opposed to Latin, 
civilization. From the eleventh century onward, at first through 
Moorish influences, the west gradually recovered what it had lost 
of the Grecian heritage. 

I come now to the four ways in which the Roman Empire 
affected the history of culture. 

I. The direct effect of Rome on Greek thought. This begins in 
the second century B.C., with two men, the historian Polybius, 
and the Stoic philosopher Panaetius. The natural attitude of the 
Greek to the Roman was one of contempt mingled with fear; 
the Greek felt himself more civilized, but politically less powerful. 
If the Romans were more successful in politics, that only showed 
that politics is an ignoble pursuit. The average Greek of the 
second century B.C. was pleasure- loving, quick-witted, clever in 
business, and unscrupulous in all things. There were, however, 
still men of philosophic capacity. Some of these notably the 
sceptics, such as Carneades had allowed cleverness to destroy 
seriousness. Some, like the Epicureans and a section of the Stoics, 
had withdrawn wholly into a quiet private life. But a few, with more 
insight than had been shown by Aristotle in relation to Alexander, 
realized that the greatness of Rome was due to certain merits 
which were lacking among the Greeks. 

The historian Polybius, born in Arcadia about 200 B.C., was 
sent to Rome as a prisoner, and there had the good fortune to 
become the friend of the younger Scipio, whom he accompanied 
on many of his campaigns. It was uncommon for a Greek to know 
Latin, though most educated Romans knew Greek; the circum- 
stances of Polybius, however, led him to a thorough familiarity 
with Latin, lie wrote, for the benefit of the Greeks, the history of 
ihc later Punic Wars, which enabled Rome to conquer the world. 

299 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

His admiration of the Roman constitution was becoming out of 
date while he wrote, but until his time it had compared very 
favourably, in stability and efficiency, with the continually 
changing constitutions of most Greek cities. The Romans naturally 
read his history with pleasure; whether the Greeks did so is 
more doubtful. 

Panaetius the Stoic has been already considered in the preceding 
chapter. He was a friend of Polybius, and, like him, a protege of 
the younger Scipio. While Scipio lived, he was frequently in 
Rome, but after Scipio's death in 129 B.C. he stayed in Athens 
as head of the Stoic school. Rome still had, what Greece had lost, 
the hopefulness connected with the opportunity for political 
activity. Accordingly the doctrines of Panaetius were more 
political, and less akin to those of the Cynics, than were those of 
earlier Stoics. Probably the admiration of Plato felt by cultivated 
Romans influenced him in abandoning the dogmatic narrowness 
of his Stoic predecessors. In the broader form given to it by him 
and by his successor Posidonius, Stoicism strongly appealed to 
the more serious among the Romans. 

At a later date, Epictetus, though a Greek, lived most of his life 
in Rome. Rome supplied him with most of his illustrations ; he is 
always exhorting the wise man not to tremble in the presence of 
the Emperor. We know the influence of Epictetus on Marcus 
Aurelius, but his influence on the Greeks is hard to trace. 

Plutarch (ca. A.D. 46-120), in his Lives of the Noble Grecians and 
Romans, traced a parallelism between the most eminent men of 
the two countries. He spent a considerable time in Rome, and was 
honoured by the Emperors Hadrian and Trajan. In addition to 
his Lives, he wrote numerous works on philosophy, religion, 
natural history, and morals. His Lives are obviously concerned 
to reconcile Greece and Rome in men's thoughts. 

On the whole, apart from such exceptional men, Rome acted 
as a blight on the Greek-speaking part of the Empire. Thought 
and art alike declined. Until the end of the second century A.D., 
life, for the well-to-do, was pleasant and easy-going; there was no 
incentive to strenuousness, and little opportunity for great achieve- 
ment. The recognized schools of philosophy the Academy, the 
Peripatetics, the Epicureans, and the Stoics continued to exist 
until they were closed by Justinian. None of these, however, 
showed any vitality throughout the time after Marcus Aurelius, 

joo 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

except the Neoplatonists in the third century A.D., whom we shall 
consider in the next chapter; and these men were hardly at all 
influenced by Rome. The Latin and Greek halves of the Empire 
became more and more divergent; the knowledge of Greek 
became rare in the west, and after Constantine Latin, in the east, 
survived only in law and in the army. 

II. The influence of Greece and the East on Rome. There are here 
two very different things to consider: first, the influence of Hellenic 
art and literature and philosophy on the most cultivated Romans; 
second, the spread of non-Hellenic religions and superstitions 
throughout the Western world. 

(i) When the Romans first came in contact with Greeks, they 
became aware of themselves as comparatively barbarous and ur- 
couth. The Greeks were immeasurably their superiors in many 
ways: in manufacture and in the technique of agriculture ; in the 
kinds of knowledge that are necessary for a good official; in con- 
versation and the art of enjoying life; in art and literature and 
philosophy. The only tilings in which the Romans were superior 
were military tactics and social cohesion. The relation of the 
Romans to the Creeks was something like that of the Prussians 
to the French in 1814 and 1815; but this latter was temporary, 
whereas the other lasted a long time. After the Punic Wars, young 
Romans conceived an admiration for the Greeks. They learnt the 
Greek language, they copied Greek architecture, they employed 
Greek sculptors. The Roman gods were identified with the gods 
of Greece. The Trojan origin of the Romans was invented to 
make a connection with the Homeric myths. Latin poets adopted 
Greek metres, Latin philosophers took over Greek theories. To 
the end, Rome was culturally parasitic on Greece. The Romans 
invented no art forms, constructed no original system of philo- 
sophy, and made no scientific discoveries. They made good roads, 
systematic legal codes, and efficient armies; for the rest they 
looked to Greece, 

The Hellenizing of Rome brought with it a certain softening of 
manners, abhorrent to the elder Cato. Until the Punic Wars, the 
Romans had been a bucolic people, with the virtues and vices ot 
farmers: austere, industrious, brutal, obstinate, and stupid. Their 
family life had been stable and solidly built on the patria potestas; 
women ;md young people were completely subordinated. All this 

301 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



changed with the influx of sudden wealth. The small farms dis- 
appeared, and were gradually replaced by huge estates on which 
slave labour was employed to carry out new scientific kinds of 
agriculture. A great class of traders grew up, and a large number 
of men enriched by plunder, like the nabobs in eighteenth-century 
England. Women, who had been virtuous slaves, became free and 
dissolute; divorce became common; the rich ceased to have 
children. The Greeks, who had gone through a similar develop- 
ment centuries ago, encouraged, by their example, what historians 
call the decay of morals. Even in the most dissolute times of the 
Empire, the average Roman still thought of Rome as the upholder 
of a purer ethical standard against the decadent corruption of 
Greece. 

The cultural influence ot Greece on the Western Kmpire 
diminished rapidly from the third century A.D. onwards, chiefly 
because culture in general decayed. For this there were many 
causes, but one in particular must be mentioned. In the last times 
of the Western Empire, the government was more undisguised!}* 
a military tyranny than it had been, and the army usually selected 
a successful general as emperor; but the army, even in its highest 
ranks, was no longer composed of cultivated Romans, but of semi- 
barbarians from the frontier. These rough soldiers had no use for 
culture, and regarded the civilized citizens solely as sources of 
revenue. Private persons were too impoverished to support much 
in the way of education, and the State considered education un- 
necessary. Consequently, in the West, only a few men of excep- 
tional learning continued to read Greek. 

(2) Non-Hellenic religion and superstition, on the contrary, 
acquired, as time went on, a firmer and firmer hold on the West. 
We have already seen how Alexander's conquests introduced the 
Greek world to the beliefs of Babylonians, Persians, and Egyptians. 
Similarly the Roman conquests made the Western world familiar 
with these doctrines, and also with those of Jews and Christians. 
I shall consider what concerns the Jews anJ Christians at a later 
stage; for the present, I shall confine myself as far as possible to 
pagan superstitions. 1 

In Rome every sect and every prophet was represented, and 
sometimes won favour in the highest government circles. Lucian, 
who stood for sane scepticism in spite of the credulity of his age. 
* See Cumom, Oriental Religion* in Roman Paganism. 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

tcfls an amusing story, generally accepted as broadly true, about 
a prophet and miracle-worker called Alexander the Paphlagonian. 
This man healed the sick and foretold the future, with excursions 
into blackmail. His fame reached the ears of Marcus Aurelius, 
then fighting the Marcomanni on the Danube. The Emperor 
consulted him as to how to win the war, and was told that if he 
threw two lions into the Danube a great victory would result. He 
followed the advice of the seer, but it was the Marcomanni who 
won the great victor)'. In spite of this mishap, Alexander's fame 
continued to grow. A prominent Roman of consular rank, Ruti- 
lianus, after consulting him on many points, at last sought his 
advice as to the choice of a wife. Alexander, like Endymion, had 
enjoyed the favours of the moon, and by her had a daughter, 
whom the oracle recommended to Rutilianus. "Rutilianus, who 
was at the time sixty years old, at once complied with the divine 
injunction, and celebrated his marriage by sacrificing whole 
hecatombs to his celestial mother-in-law." 1 

More important than the career of Alexander the Paphlagonian 
was the reign of the Krnperor Klagabalus or Heliogabalus (A.D. 218- 
22), who was, until his elevation by the choice of the army, a 
Syrian priest of the sun. In his slow progress from Syria to Rome, 
he was preceded by his portrait, sent as a present to the Senate. 
"He was drawn in his sacerdotal robes of silk and gold, after the 
loose flowing fashion of the Medes and Phoenicians; his head 
was covered with a lofty tiara, his numerous collars and bracelets 
were adorned with gems of inestimable value. His eyebrows were 
tinged with black, and his cheeks painted with an artificial red 
and white. The grave senators confessed with a sigh, that, after 
having long experienced the stern tyranny of their own country- 
men, Rome was at length humbled beneath the effeminate luxury 
of Oriental despotism." 1 Supported by a large section in the army, 
he proceeded, with fanatical zeal, to introduce in Rome the 
religious practices of the East ; his name was that of the sun-god 
worshipped at Emesa, where he had been chief priest. His mother, 
or grandmother, who was the real ruler, perceived that he had 
Kone too far, and deposed him in favour of her nephew Alexander 
(222-35), whoe Oriental proclivities were more moderate. The 
mixture of creeds that wa$ possible in his day was illustrated in 

Brnn, Tht Check PMlmofhen. Vol. II, p. 226. 

Gibbon, chap. vi. 

303 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

his private chapel, in which he placed the statues of Abraham 
Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, and Christ. 
. The religion of Mithras, which was of Persian origin, was a 
close competitor of Christianity, especially during the latter half 
of the third century A.D. The emperors, who were making desperate 
attempts to control the army, felt that religion might give a much 
needed stability; but it would have to be one of the new religions, 
since it was these that the soldiers favoured. The cult was intro- 
duced at Rome, and had much to commend it to the military mind. 
Mithras was a sun-god, but not so effeminate as his Syrian col- 
league ; he was a god concerned with war, the great war between 
good and evil which had been part of the Persian creed since 
Zoroaster. Rostovtseff 1 reproduces a bas-relief representing his 
worship, which was found in a subterranean sanctuary at Heddern- 
heim in Germany, and shows that his disciples must have been 
numerous among the soldiers, not only in the East, but in the 
West also. 

Constantine's adoption of Christianity was politically successful, 
whereas earlier attempts to introduce a new religion failed; but 
the earlier attempts were, from a governmental point of view, very 
similar to his. All alike derived their possibility of success from 
the misfortunes and weariness of the Roman world. The traditional 
religions of Greece and Rome were suited to men interested in the 
terrestrial world, and hopeful of happiness on earth. Asia, with a 
longer experience of despair, had evolved more successful anti- 
dotes in the form of other-worldly hopes; of all these, Christianity 
was the most effective in bringing consolation. But Christianity, 
by the time it became the State religion, had absorbed much from 
Greece, and transmitted this, along with the Judaic element, to 
succeeding ages in the West. 

III. The unification of government and culture. We owe it first 

to Alexander and then to Rome that the achievements of the great 

age of Greece were not lost to the world, like those of the Minoan 

age. In the fifth century B.C., a Jenghiz Khan, if one had happened 

to arise, could have wiped out all that was important in the 

Hellenic world; Xerxes, with a little more competence, might 

have made Greek civilization very greatly inferior to what it 

became after he was repulsed. Consider the period from Aeschylus 

1 History of the Ancient World, Vol. II, p. 343. 

304 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

to Plato: all that was done in this time was done by a minority 
of the population of a few commercial cities. These cities, as the 
future showed, had no great capacity for withstanding foreign 
conquest, but by an extraordinary stroke of good fortune their 
conquerors, Macedonian and Roman, were Philhellenes, and did 
not destroy what they conquered, as Xerxes or Carthage would 
have done. The fact that we are acquainted with what was done 
by the (1 reeks in an and literature and philosophy and science 
is due to the stability introduced by Western conquerors who had 
the good sense to admire the civilization which they governed 
but did their utmost to preserve. 

In certain respects, political and ethical, Alexander and the 
Romans were the causes of a better philosophy than any that was 
professed by Greeks in their days of freedom. The Stoics, as we 
have seen, believed in the brotherhood of man, and did not confine 
their sympathies to the Greeks. The long dominion of Rome 
accustomed men to the idea of a single civilization under a single 
government, li'e are aware that there were important parts of the 
world which were not subject to Rome India and China, more 
especially. But to the Roman it seemed that outside the Empire there 
were only more or less barbarian tribes, who might be conquered 
whenever it should be worth while to make the effort. Essentially 
and in idea, the empire, in the minds of the Romans, was world- 
wide. This conception descended to the Church, which was 
"Catholic" in spite of Buddhists, Confucians, and (later) Moham- 
medans. tSVruriis judicat orbis terrarum is a maxim taken over by 
ihr Church from the later Stoics; it owes its appeal to the apparent 
uimcr&ality of the Roman Empire. Throughout the Middle Ages, 
after the time of Charlemagne, the Church and the Holy Roman 
Kmpirt were world-xude in idea, although everybody knew that 
they were not so in fact. The conception of one human family, 
one Catholic religion, one universal culture, and one world-wide 
State, has haunted men's thoughts ever since its approximate 
realization by Rome. 

The part played by Rome in enlarging the area of civilization 
was of immense importance. Northern Italy, Spain, France, and 
parts of western Germany, were civilized as a result of forcible 
conquest by the Roman legions. All these regions proved them- 
selves just as capable of a high level of culture as Rome itself. 
In the last days of the Western Empire, Gaul produced men who 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

were at least the equals of their contemporaries in regions of 
older civilization. It was owing to the diffusion of culture by 
Rome that the barbarians produced only a temporary eclipse, 
not a permanent darkness. It may be argued that the quality of 
civilization was never again as good as in the Athens of Pericles; 
but in a world of war and destruction, quantity is, in the long 
run, almost as important as quality, and quantity was due to 
Rome. 

IV. The Mohammedans as vehicles of Hellenism. In the seventh 
century, the disciples of the Prophet conquered Syria, Egypt, and 
North Africa; in the following century, they conquered Spain. 
Their victories were easy, and the fighting was slight. Except 
possibly during the first few years, they were not fanatical; 
Christians and Jews were unmolested so long as they paid the 
tribute. Very soon the Arabs acquired the civilization of the 
Eastern Empire, but with the hopefulness of a rising polity 
instead of the weariness of decline. Their learned men read 
Greek authors in translation, and wrote commentaries. Aristotle's 
reputation is mainly due to them ; in antiquity, he was not regarded 
as on a level with Plato. 

It is instructive to consider some of the words that we derive 
from Arabic, such as: algebra, alcohol, alchemy, alembic, alkali, 
azimuth, zenith. With the exception of "alcohol" which meant, 
not a drink, but a substance used in chemistr these words 
would give a good picture of some of the things we owe to the 
Arabs. Algebra had been invented by the Alexandrian Greeks, 
but was carried further by the Mohammedans. "Alchemy/ 
"alembic," "alkali" are words connected with the attempt to 
turn base metals into gold, which the Arabs took over from the 
Greeks, and in pursuit of which they appealed to Greek philo- 
sophy. 1 "Azimuth" and "zenith" are astronomical terms, chiefly 
useful to the Arabs in connection with astrology. 

The etymological method conceals what we owe to the Arabs 
as regards knowledge of Greek philosophy, because, when it was 
again studied in Europe, the technical term* required were taken 
from Greek or Latin. In philosophy, the Arabs were better as 
commentators than as original thinkers. Their importance, for us, 

1 Sec Alchemy, Child of Greek Philtxaphy, by Arthur John Hopkin*, 
Columbia, 1934. 

306 



THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN RELATION TO CULTURE 

is that they, and not the Christians, were the immediate inheritors 
of those parts of the Greek tradition which only the Eastern 
Empire had kept alive. Contact with the Mohammedans, in Spain, 
and to a lesser extent in Sicily, made the West aware of Aristotle; 
also ot Arabic numerals, algebra, and chemistry. It was this 
contact that began the revival of learning in the eleventh century, 
leading to the Scholastic philosophy. It was later, from the 
thirteenth century onward, that the study of Greek enabled men 
to go direct to the works of Plato and Aristotle and other Greek 
writers of antiquity. Rut if the Arabs had not preserved the 
tradition, the men of the Renaissance might not have suspected 
how much was to he gained by the revival of classical learning. 



307 



Chapter XXX 
PLOTINUS 

PLOTINUS (A.D. 204-70), the founder of Neoplatonism, is 
the last of the great philosophers of antiquity. His life is 
almost coextensive with one of the most disastrous periods 
in Roman history. Shortly before his birth, the army had become 
conscious of its power, and had adopted the practice of choosing 
emperors in return for monetary rewards, and assassinating them 
afterwards to give occasion for a renewed sale of the empire. 
These preoccupations unfitted the soldiers for the defence of the 
frontier, and permitted vigorous incursions of Germans from the 
north and Persians from the Hast. War and pestilence diminished 
the population of the empire by about a third, while increased 
taxation and diminished resources caused financial ruin in even 
those provinces to which no hostile forces penetrated. The cities, 
which had been the bearers of culture, were especially hard hit ; 
substantial citizens, in large numbers, fled to escape the tax* 
collector. It was not till after the death of Plotinus that order was 
re-established and the empire temporarily saved by the vigorous 
measures of Diocletian and Constantine. 

Of all this there is no mention in the works of Plotinus. He 
turned aside from the spectacle of ruin and misery in the actual 
world, to contemplate an eternal world ot goodness and beauty. 
In this he was in harmony with all the most serious men of his 
age. To all of them, Christians and pagans alike, the world of 
practical affairs seemed to offer no hope, and only the Other 
World seemed worthy of allegiance. To the Christian, the Other 
World was the Kingdom of Heaven, to be enjoyed after death; 
to the Platonist, it was the eternal world of ideas, the real world 
as opposed to that of illusory appearance. Christian theologians 
combined these points of view, and embodied much of the philo- 
sophy of Plotinus. Dean Inge, in his invaluable book on Plotinus, 
rightly emphasizes what Christianity owes to him. "Platonism," 
he says, "is part of the vital structure of Christian theology, with 
which no other philosophy, I venture to say. can work without 
friction/' There is, he says, an "utter impossibility of excising 
Platonism from Christianity without tearing Christianity to 

308 



PLOTINUS 

pieces." He points out that Saint Augustine speaks of Plato's 
system as "the most pure and bright in all philosophy/' and of 
Plotinus as a man in whom "Plato lived again," and who, if he 
had lived a little later, would have "changed a few words and 
phrases and become Christian." Saint Thomas Aquinas, according 
to Dean Inge, "is nearer to Plotinus than to the real Aristotle." 

Plotinus, accordingly, is historically important as an influence 
in moulding the Christianity of the Middle Ages and of Catholic 
theology. The historian, in speaking of Christianity, has to be 
careful to recognize the very great changes that it has undergone, 
and the variety of forms that it may assume even at one epoch. 
The Christianity of the Synoptic Gospels is almost innocent of 
metaphysics. The Christianity of modern America, in this respect, 
is like primitive Christianity; Platonism is alien to popular thought 
and feeling in the United States, and most American Christians 
are much mere concerned with duties here on earth, and with 
social progress in the everyday world, than with the transcendental 
hopes that consoled men when everything terrestrial inspired 
despair. I am not speaking of any change of dogma, but of a 
difference of emphasis and interest. A modern Christian, unless 
he realizes how great this difference is, will fail to understand the 
Christianity of the past. We, since our study is historical, are con- 
cerned with the effective beliefs of past centuries, and as to these 
it is impossible to disagree with what Dean Inge says on the 
influence of Plato and Plotinus. 

Plotinus, however, is not only historically important. He repre- 
sents, better than any other philosopher, an important type of 
theory. A philosophical system may be judged important for 
various different kinds of reasons. The first and most obvious is 
that we think it may be true. Not many students of philosophy 
at the present time would feel this about Plotinus; Dean Inge is, 
in this respect, a rare exception. But truth is not the only merit 
that a mctaphysic can possess. It may have beauty, and this is 
certainly to be found in Plotinus; there are passages that remind 
one of the later cantos of Dante's Paradise, and of almost nothing 
else in literature. Now and again, his descriptions of the eternal 

world of glory 

To our high-wrought fantasy present 
That undisturbed song of pure concent 
Aye sung before the sapphire-coloured throne 
To Him that sits thereon. 
309 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Again, a philosophy may be important because it expresses well 
what men are prone to believe in certain moods or in certain cir- 
cumstances. Uncomplicated joy and sorrow is not matter for 
philosophy, but rather for the simpler kinds of poetry and music. 
Only joy and sorrow accompanied by reflection on the universe 
generate metaphysical theories. A man may be a cheerful pessimist 
or a melancholy optimist. Perhaps Samuel Butler may serve as 
an example of the first; Plotinus is an admirable example of the 
second. In an age such as that in which he lived, unhappiness is 
immediate and pressing, whereas happiness, if attainable at all, 
must be sought by reflection upon things that are remote from the 
impressions of sense. Such happiness has in it always an element 
of strain ; it is very unlike the simple happiness of a child. And 
since it is not derived from the everyday world, but from thought 
and imagination, it demands a power of ignoring or despising the 
life of the senses. It is, therefore, not those who enjoy instinctive 
happiness who invent the kinds of metaphysical optimism that 
depend upon belief in the reality of a super-sensible world. Among 
the men who have been unhappy in a mundane sense, but reso- 
lutely determined to find a higher happiness in the world of 
theory, Plotinus holds a very high place. 

Nor are his purely intellectual merits by any means to be 
despised. He has, in many respects, clarified Plato's teaching; he 
has developed, with as much consistency as possible, the type of 
theory advocated by him in common with many others. His 
arguments against materialism are good, and his whole conception 
of the relation of soul and body is clearer than that of Plato or 
Aristotle. 

Like Spinoza, he has a certain kind of moral purity and loftiness, 
which is very impressive. He is always sincere, never shrill or 
censorious, invariably concerned to tell the reader, as simply as 
he can, what he believes to be important. Whatever one may think 
of him as a theoretical philosopher, it is impossible not to love 
him as a man. 

The life of Plotinus is known, so far as it is known, through the 
biography written by his friend and disciple Porphyry, a Semite 
whose real name was Malchus. There are, however, miraculous 
elements in this account, which maker it difficult to place a complete 
reliance upon its more credible portions. 
Plotinus considered his spatio-temporal appearance unim~ 

310 



PLOTINU8 



portant, and was loath to talk about the accidents of his historical 
existence. He stated, however, that he was born in Egypt, and it 
is known that as a young man he studied in Alexandria, where 
he lived until the age of thirty-nine, and where his teacher was 
Ammonius Saccas, often regarded as the founder of Neoplatonism. 
He then joined the expedition of the Emperor Gordian III against 
the Persians, with the intention, it is said, of studying the religions 
of the East. The Emperor was still a youth, and was murdered by 
the army, as was at that time the custom. This occurred during 
his campaign in Mesopotamia in A.D. 244. Plotinus thereupon 
abandoned his oriental projects and settled in Rome, where 
he soon began to teach. Among his hearers were many influen- 
tial men, and he was favoured by the Emperor Gallienus. 1 At 
one time he formed a project of founding Plato's Republic in 
Campania, and building for the purpose a new city to be called 
Platonopolis. The Kmperor, at first, was favourable, but ulti- 
mately withdrew his permission. It may seem strange that there 
should be room for a new city so near Rome, but probably by that 
time the region was malarial, as it is now, but had not been earlier. 
He wrote nothing until the age of forty-nine; after that, he wrote 
much. His works \u-re edited and arranged by Porphyry, who 
was more Pythagorean than Plotinus, and caused the Neoplatonist 
school to become more supernaturilist than it would have been 
if it had followed Plotinns more faithfully. 

The respect of Plotinus for Plato is very great; Plato is usually 
alluded to as "He." In general, the "blessed ancients" are treated 
with reverence, but this reverence does not extend to the atomists. 
The Stoics and Epicureans, being still active, are controverted, 
the Stoics only for their materialism, the Epicureans for every 
part of their philosophy. Aristotle plays a larger part than appears, 
as borrowings from him are often unacknowledged. One feels the 
influence of Parmenides at many points. 

The Plato of Plotinus is not so full-blooded as the real Plato. 

Concerning Gailienus, Gibbon remarks : "He was a master of several 
curieTbttl JL ^-nccs, a ready orator and - e egant poe^i i*dftd 
excellent cook, and most contemptible pnnce. When the 
iet of the St,te required his presence and attention he 
convention with the philosopher Plotmus, wasting hi, 
or licentious pleasure., preparing his .motto. , the 
in myU or eliciting a place in the Areopagus of Athens 
'chap. x). 

3" 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The theory of ideas, the mystical doctrines of the Phaedo and of 
Book VI of the Republic, and the discussion of love in the Sym- 
posium, make up almost the whole of Plato as he appears in the 
Emieads (as the books of Plotinus are called). The political interests, 
the search for definitions of separate virtues, the pleasure in 
mathematics, the dramatic and affectionate appreciation of indi- 
viduals, and above all the playfulness of Plato, are wholly absent 
from Plotinus. Plato, as Carlyle said, is "very much at his ease 
in Zion"; Plotinus, on the contrary, is always on his best behaviour. 
The metaphysics of Plotinus begins with a Holy Trinity: The 
One, Spirit and Soul. These three are not equal, like the Persons 
of the Christian Trinity; the One is supreme, Spirit conies next, 
and Soul last. 1 

The One is somewhat shadowy. It is sometimes called God, 
sometimes the Good ; it transcends Being, which is the first sequent 
upon the One. We must not attribute predicates to it, but only 
say "It is." (This is reminiscent of Parmenides.) It would be a 
mistake to speak of God as "the All," because God transcends 
the All. God is present through all things. The One can be present 
without any coming: ** while it is nowhere, nowhere is it not." 
Although the One is sometimes spoken of as the Good, we arc- 
also told that it precedes both the Good and the Beautiful.* 
Sometimes, the One appears to resemble Aristotle's God; we arc 
told that God has no need of His derivatives, and ignores the 
created world. The One is indefinable, and in regard to it there 
is more truth in silence than in any words whatever. 

We now come to the Second Person, whom Plotinus calls nous. 
It is always difficult to find an English word to represent nous. 
The standard dictionary translation is "mind," but this does not 
have the correct connotations, particularly when the word is used 
in a religious philosophy. If we were to say that Plotinus put 
mind above soul, we should give a completely wrong impression. 
McKenna, the translator of Plotinus, uses "Intellectual-Principle/' 
but this is awkward, and does not suggest an object suitable for 
religious veneration. Dean Inge uses "Spirit," which is perhaps 

1 Origen, who waa a contemporary of Plotinus and had the tame teacher 
to philosophy, taught that the Fiitt Pcnon waa auperior to the Second, 
and the Second to the Third, agreeing in (hit with Plotinua. But 
view wa* aubaequently declared heretical. 

1 Ftfth Ermtad, Fifth Tractate, chap. 12. 

3'* 



PLOTINUS 

the best word available. But it leaves out the intellectual element 
which was important in all Greek religious philosophy after 
Pythagoras. Mathematics, the world of ideas, and all thought 
about what is not sensible, have, for Pythagoras, Plato, and 
Plotinus, something divine; they constitute the activity of nous, 
or at least the nearest approach to its activity that we can conceive. 
It was this intellectual element in Plato's religion that led Chris- 
tiansnotably the author of Saint John's Gospel to identify 
Christ with the Logos. Logos should be translated "reason" in this 
connection ; this prevents us from using "reason" as the translation 
of nous. I shall follow Dean Inge in using "Spirit," but with the 
proviso that nous has an intellectual connotation which is absent 
from "Spirit" as usually understood. But often I shall use the 
word nous untranslated. 

Nous, we are told, is the image of the One; it is engendered 
because the One, in its self-quest, has vision; this seeing is nous. 
This is a difficult conception. A Being without parts, Plotinus says, 
may know itself; in this case, the seer and the seen are one. In 
God, who is conceived, as by Plato, on the analogy of the sun, the 
light-giver and what is lit are the same. Pursuing the analogy, nous 
may be considered as the lit^ht by which the One sees itself. It is 
possible for us to know the Divine Mind, which we forget through 
self-will. To know the Divine Mind, we must study our own 
toul when it is most god-like: we must put aside the body, and 
the part of the soul that moulded the body, and "sense with 
desires and impulses and every such futility"; what is then left 
is an image of the Divine Intellect. 

"Those divinely possessed and inspired have at least the know- 
ledge that they hold some greater thing within them, though they 
cannot tell what it is; from the movements that stir them and the 
utterances that come from them they perceive the power, not 
themselves, that moves them: in the same way, it must be, we 
stand towards the Supreme when we hold nous pure; we know 
the Divine Mind within, that which gives Being and all else of 
that order: but we know, too, that other, know that it is none of 
these, but a nobler principle than anything we know as Being; 
fuller and greater; above reason, mind, and feeling; conferring 
these powers, not to be confounded with them." 1 

Thus when we are "divinely possessed and inspired" we see not 
1 Eimtad*. V, 3, 14- McKenna's translation. 
3'3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

only nous, but also the One. When we are thus in contact with the 
Divine, we cannot reason or express the vision in words ; this comes 
later. "At the moment of touch there is no power whatever to make 
any affirmation; there is no leisure; reasoning upon the vision is 
for afterwards. We may know we have had the vision when the 
Soul has suddenly taken light. This light is from the Supreme and 
is the Supreme; we may believe in the Presence when, like that 
other God on the call of a certain man, He comes bringing light; 
the light is the proof of the advent. Thus, the Soul unlit remains 
without that vision; lit, it possesses what it sought. And this is 
the true end set before the Soul, to take that light, to see the 
Supreme by the Supreme and not by the light of any other 
principle to see the Supreme which is also the means to the 
vision ; for that which illumines the Soul is that which it is to see 
just as it is by the sun's own light that we see the sun. 

But how is this to be accomplished ? 
Cut away everything/' 1 

The experience of "ecstasy" (standing outside one's own body) 
happened frequently to Plotinus: 

Many times it has happened: Lifted out of the body into myself; 
becoming external to all other things and self-encentred ; behold- 
ing a marvellous beauty; then, more than ever, assured of com- 
munity with the loftiest order; enacting the noblest life, acquiring 
identity with the divine; stationing within It by having attained 
that activity; poised above whatsoever in the Intellectual is less 
than the Supreme : yet, there comes the moment of descent from 
intellection to reasoning, and after that sojourn in the divine, I ask 
myself how it happens that I can now be descending, and how did 
the Soul ever enter into my body, the Soul which even within the 
body, is the high thing it has shown itself to be. 1 

This brings us to Soul, the third and lowest member of the 
Trinity. Soul, though inferior to nous, is the author of all living 
things; it made the sun and moon and stars, and the whole visible 
world. It is the offspring of the Divine Intellect. It is double: 
there is an inner soul, intent on nous, and another, which faces 
the external. The latter is associated with a downward movement, 
in which the Soul generates its image, which is Nature and the 
world of sense. The Stoics had identified Nature with God, but 

1 Eimtadt, V, 3, 17. 2 IV, 8, i 

3'4 



PLOTINU8 

Plotinus regards it as the lowest sphere, something emanating 
from the Soul when it forgets to look upward towards nous. 
This might suggest the Gnostic view that the visible world is evil, 
but Plotinus does not take this view. The visible world is beautiful, 
and is the abode of blessed spirits; it is only less good than the 
intellectual world. In a very interesting controversial discussion 
of the Gnostic view, that the cosmos and its Creator are evil, he 
admits that some parts of Gnostic doctrine, such as the hatred of 
matter, may be due to Plato, but holds that the other parts, which 
do not come from Plato, are untrue. 

His objections to Gnosticism are of two sorts. On the one hand, 
he says that Soul, when it creates the material world, does so from 
memory of the divine, and not because it is fallen; the world of 
sense, he thinks, is as good as a sensible world can be. He feels 
strongly the beauty of things perceived by the senses: 

Who that truly perceives the harmony of the Intellectual 
Realm could fail, if he has any bent towards music, to answer to 
the harmony in sensible sounds? What geometrician or arith- 
metician could fail to take pleasure in the symmetries, corre- 
spondences and principles of order observed in visible things? 
Consider, even, the case of pictures : those seeing by the bodily 
sense the productions of the art of painting do not see the one 
thing in the one only way ; they are deeply stirred by recognizing 
in the objects depicted to the eyes the presentation of what lies 
in the idea, and so are called to recollection of the truth the 
very experience out of which Love rises. Now, if the sight of 
Beauty excellently reproduced upon a face hurries the mind to 
that other Sphere, surely no one seeing the loveliness lavish in 
the world of sense this vast orderliness, the form which the stars 
even in their remoteness display, no one could be so dull-witted, 
so immoveable, as not to be carried by all this to recollection, 
and gripped by reverent awe in the thought of all this, so great, 
sprung from that greatness. Not to answer thus could only be to 
have neither fathomed this world nor had any vision of that 
other (II, 9, 16). 

There is another reason for rejecting the Gnostic view. The 
Gnostics think that nothing divine is associated with the sun, 
moon, and stars; they were created by an evil spirit. Only the soul 
of man, among things perceived, has any goodness. But Plotinus 
is firmly persuaded that the heavenly bodies are the bodies of 

315 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

god-like beings, immeasurably superior to man. According to the 
Gnostics, "their own soul, the soul of the least of mankind, they 
declare deathless, divine; but the entire heavens and the stars 
within the heavens have had no communion with the Immortal 
Principle, though these are far purer and lovelier than their own 
souls" (II, 9, 5). For the view of Plotinus there is authority in 
the Timaeus, and it was adopted by some Christian Fathers, for 
instance, Origen. It is imaginatively attractive; it expresses 
feelings that the heavenly bodies naturally inspire, and makes 
man less lonely in the physical universe. 

There is in the mysticism of Plotinus nothing morose or hostile 
to beauty. But he is the last religious teacher, for many centuries, 
of whom this can be said. Beauty, and all the pleasures associated 
with it, came to be thought to be of the Devil ; pagans, as well as 
Christians, came to glorify ugliness and dirt. Julian the Apostate, 
like contemporary orthodox saints, boasted of the populousness 
of liis beard. Of all this, there is nothing in Plotinus. 

Matter is created by Soul, and has no independent reality. 
Every Soul has its hour; when that strikes, it descends, and enters 
the body suitable to it. The motive is not reason, but something 
more analogous to sexual desire. When the soul leaves the body, 
it must enter another body if it has been sinful, for justice requires 
that it should be punished. If, in this life, you have murdered 
your mother, you will, in the next life, be a woman, and be 
murdered by your son (HI, 2, 13). Sin must be punished; but the 
punishment happens naturally, through the restless driving of the 
sinner's errors. 

Do we remember this life after we are dead ? The answer is per- 
fectly logical, but not what most modem theologians would say. 
Memory is concerned with our life in time, whereas our best and 
truest life is in eternity. Therefore, as the soul grows towards 
eternal life, it mil remember less and less; friends, children, wife, 
will be gradually forgotten; ultimately, we shall know nothing of 
the things of this world, but only contemplate the intellectual 
realm. There will be no memory of personality, which, in con- 
templative vision, is unaware of itself. The soul will become one 
with nous, but not to its own destruction : nous and the individual 
soul will be simultaneously two and one (IV, 4, 2). 

In the Fourth Emend, which is on the Soul, one section, the 
Seventh Tractate, is devoted to the discussion of immortality. 

116 



PLOTINUS 

The body, being compound, is clearly not immortal; if, then, 
it is part of us, we are not wholly immortal. But what is the relation 
of the soul to the body ? Aristotle (who is not mentioned explicitly) 
said the soul was the form of the body, but Plotinus rejects this 
view, on the ground that the intellectual act would be impossible 
if the soul were any form of body. The Stoics think that the soul 
is material, but the unity of the soul proves that this is impossible. 
Moreover, since matter is passive, it cannot have created itself; 
matter could not exist if soul had not created it, and, if soul did 
not exist, matter would disappear in a twinkling. The soul is 
neither matter nor the form of a material body, but Essence, and 
Essence is eternal. This view is implicit in Plato's argument that 
the soul is immortal because ideas arc eternal ; but it is only with 
Plotinus that it becomes explicit. 

How does the soul enter the body from the aloofness of the 
intellectual world ? The answer is, through appetite. But appetite, 
though sometimes ignoble, may be comparatively noble. At best, 
the soul "has the desire of elaborating order on the model of 
what it has seen in the Intellectual-Principle (nous). 99 That is to 
say, soul contemplates the inward realm of essence, and wishes 
to produce something, as like it as possible, that can be seen by 
looking without instead of looking within like (we might say) a 
composer who first imagines his music, and then wishes to hear it 
performed by an orchestra. 

But this desire of the soul to create has unfortunate results. So 
long as the soul lives in the pure world of essence, it is not separated 
from other souls living in the same world ; but as soon as it becomes 
joined to a body, it has the task of governing what is lower than 
itself, and by this task it becomes separate from other souls, which 
have other bodies. Except in a few men at a few moments, the 
soul becomes chained to the body. "The body obscures the truth, 
but there 1 all stands out clear and separate 11 (IV, 9, 5). 

This doctrine, like Plato's, has difficulty in avoiding the view 
that the creation was a mistake. The soul at its best is content 
with nous, the world of essence ; if it were always at its best, it 
would not create, but only contemplate. It seems that the act of 

4 Plotinus habitually uses "There" as a Christian might as it is used, 
for instance, in 

The life that knows no ending, 
The tearless life is There. 

317 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

creation is to be excused on the ground that the created world, 
in its main lines, is the best that is logically possible; but this is 
a copy of the eternal world, and as such has the beauty that is 
possible to a copy. The most definite statement is in the Tractate 
on the Gnostics (II, 9, 8): 

To ask why the Soul has created the Kosmos, is to ask why there 
is a Soul and why a Creator creates. The question, also, implies a 
beginning in the eternal and, further, represents creation as the act 
of a changeful Being who turns from this to that. 

Those that think so must be instructed if they would but bear 
with correction in the nature of the Supernals, and brought to 
desist from that blasphemy of majestic powers which comes so 
easily to them, where all should be reverent scruple. 

Even in the administration of the Universe there is no ground 
for such attack, for it affords manifest proof of the greatness of 
the Intellectual Kind. 

This All that has emerged into life is no amorphous structure 
like those lesser forms within it which are born night and day out 
of the lavishness of its vitality the Universe is a life organised, 
effective, complex, all-comprehensive, displaying an unfathomable 
wisdom. How, then, can anyone deny that it is a clear image, beau- 
tifully formed, of the Intellectual Divinities ? No doubt it is a copy, 
not original ; but that is its very nature ; it cannot be at once symbol 
and reality. But to say that it is an inadequate copy is false ; nothing 
has been left out which a beautiful representation within the physi- 
cal order could include. 

Such a reproduction there must necessarily be though not by 
deliberation and contrivance for the Intellectual could not be the 
last of things, but must have a double Act, one within itself, and 
one outgoing; there must, then, be something later than the 
Divine; for only the thing with which all power ends fails to pass 
downwards something of itself. 

This is perhaps the best answer to the Gnostics that the prin- 
ciples of Plotinus make possible. The problem, in slightly different 
language, was inherited by Christian theologians ; they, also, have 
found it difficult to account for the creation without allowing the 
blasphemous conclusion that, before it, something was lacking 
to the Creator. Indeed, their difficulty is greater than that of 
Plotinus, for he may say that the nature of Mind made creation 
inevitable, whereas, for the Christian, the world resulted from the 
untrammelled exercise of God's free will 



PLCtlNUS 

Plotinus has a very vivid sense of a certain kind of abstract 
beauty. In describing the position of Intellect as intermediate 
between the One and Soul, he suddenly bursts out into a passage 
of rare eloquence: 

The Supreme in its progress could never be borne forward upon 
some soulless vehicle nor even directly upon the Soul: it will be 
heralded by some ineffable beauty: before the Great King in his 
progress there comes first the minor train, thn rank by rank the 
greater and more exalted, closer to the King the kinglier; next his 
own honoured company until, last among all these grandeurs, 
suddenly appears the Supreme Monarch himself, and all unless 
indeed for those who have contented themselves with the spectacle 
before his coming and gone away prostrate themselves and hail 
him (V, 5, 3). 

There is a Tractate on Intellectual Beauty, which shows the 
same kind of feeling (V, 8): 

Assuredly all the gods are august and beautiful in a beauty 
beyond our speech. And what makes them so? Intellect; and 
especially Intellect operating within them (the divine sun and 
stars) to visibility. . . . 

To "live at ease" is There; and to these divine beings verity is 
mother and nurse, existence and sustenance; all that is not of 
process but of authentic being they see, and themselves in all; for 
all is transparent, nothing dark, nothing resistant; every being is 
lucid to every other, in breadth and depth; light runs through 
light. And each of them contains all within itself, and at the same 
time sees all in every other, so that everywhere there is all, and all 
is all and each all, and infinite the glory. Each of them is great; 
the small is great ; the sun, There, is all the stars ; and every star, 
again, is all the stars and sun. While some manner of being is 
dominant in each, all are mirrored in every other. 

In addition to the imperfection which the world inevitably 
possesses because it is a copy, there is, for Plotinus as for the 
Christians, the more positive evil that results from sin. Sin is a 
consequence of free will, which Plotinus upholds as against the 
determinists, and, more particularly, the astrologers. He does not 
venture to deny the validity of astrology altogether, but he attempts 
to set bounds to it, BO as to make what remains compatible with 
free will. He does the same as regards magic; the sage, he says, is 
exempt from the power of the magician. Porphyry relates that a 

3*9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

rival philosopher tried to put evil spells on Plotinus, but that' 
because of his holiness and wisdom, the spells recoiled on the 
rival. Porphyry, and all the followers of Plotinus, are much more 
superstitious than he is. Superstition, in him, is as slight as was 
possible in that age. 

Let us now endeavour to sum up the merits and defects of the 
doctrine taught by Plotinus, and in the main accepted by Christian 
theology so long as, it remained systematic and intellectual. 

There is, first and foremost, the construction of what Plotinus 
believed to be a secure refuge for ideals and hopes, and one, more- 
over, which involved both moral and intellectual effort. In the 
third century, and in the centuries after the barbarian invasion, 
western civilization came near to total destruction. It was fortunate 
that, while theology was almost the sole surviving mental activity, 
the system that was accepted was not purely superstitious, but 
preserved, though sometimes deeply buried, doctrines which 
embodied much of the work of Greek intellect and much of the 
moral devotion that is common to the Stoics and the Neoplatonists. 
This made possible the rise of the scholastic philosophy, and later, 
with the Renaissance, the stimulus derived from the renewed 
study of Plato, and thence of the other ancients. 

On the other hand, the philosophy of Plotinus has the defect 
of encouraging men to look within rather than to look without : 
when we look within we see nous, which is divine, while when we 
look without we see the imperfections of the sensible world. This 
kind of subjectivity was a gradual growth ; it is to be found in the 
doctrines of Protagoras, Socrates, and Plato, as well as in the 
Stoics and Epicureans. But at first it was only doctrinal, not 
temperamental ; for a long time it failed to kill scientific curiosity. 
We saw how Posidonius, about 100 B.C., travelled to Spain and 
the Atlantic coast of Africa to study the tides. Gradually, however, 
subjectivism invaded men's feelings as well as their doctrines. 
Science was no longer cultivated, and only virtue was thought 
important. Virtue, as conceived by Plato, involved all that was 
then possible in the way of mental achievement; but in later 
centuries it came to be thought of, increasingly, as involving only 
the virtuous wiU, and not a desire to understand the physical 
world or improve the world of human institutions. Christianity, 
in its ethical doctrines, was not free from this defect, although in 
practice belief in the importance of spreading the Christian faith 

.120 * 



PLOTINUS 

gave a practicable object for moral activity, which was no longer 
confined to the perfecting of self. 

Plotinus is both an end and a beginning an end as regards the 
Greeks, a beginning as regards Christendom. To the ancient world, 
weary with centuries of disappointment, exhausted by despair, 
his doctrine might be acceptable, but could not be stimulating. 
To the cruder barbarian world, where superabundant energy 
needed to be restrained and regulated rather than stimulated, 
what could penetrate in his teaching was beneficial, since the 
evil to be combated was not languor but brutality. The work of 
transmitting what could survive of his philosophy was performed 
by the Christian philosophers of the last age of Rome. 



// u/or > o/ W nt cr n l>k tttuoff h > J 2 1 



Book Two CATHOLIC PHILOSOPHY 



INTRODUCTION 7 

CATHOLIC philosophy, in the sense in which 1 shall use the 
term, is that which dominated European thought from 
Augustine to the Renaissance. There have been philo- 
sophers, before and after this period often centuries, who belonged 
to the same general school. Before Augustine there were the early 
Fathers, especially Origen; after the Renaissance there are many, 
'ncluding, at the present day, all orthodox Catholic teachers of 
philosophy, who adhere to some medieval system, especially that 
of Thomas Aquinas. But it is only from Augustine to the Re- 
naissance that the greatest philosophers of the age are concerned 
in building up or perfecting the Catholic synthesis. In the Christian 
centuries before Augustine, Stoics and Neoplatonists outshine the 
Fathers in philosophic ability; after the Renaissance, none of the 
outstanding philosophers, even among those who were orthodox 
Catholics, were concerned to carry on the Scholastic or the 
Augustinian tradition. 

The period with which we shall be concerned in this book differs 
from earlier and later times not only in philosophy, but in many 
other ways. The most notable of these is the power of the Church. 
The Church brought philosophic beliefs into a closer relation to 
social and political circumstances than they have ever had before 
or since the medieval period, which we may reckon from about 
A.I). 400 to about A.D. 1400. The Church is a social institution 
built upon a creed, partly philosophic, partly concerned with 
sacred history. It achieved power and wealth by means of its creed. 
The lay rulers, who were in frequent conflict with it, were defeated 
because the great majority' of the population, including most of 
the lay rulers themselves, were profoundly convinced of the truth 
of the Catholic faith. There were traditions, Roman and Germanic, 
against which the Church had to fight. The Roman tradition was 
strongest in Italy, especially among lawyers; the German tradition 
was strongest in the feudal aristocracy that arose out of the bar- 
barian conquest. But for many centuries neither of these traditions 

122 



INTRODUCTION 

proved strong enough to generate a successful opposition to the 
Church ; and this was largely due to the fact that they were not 
embodied in any adequate philosophy. 

A history of thought, such as that upon which we are engaged, 
is unavoidably one-sided in dealing with the Middle Ages. With 
very few exceptions, all the men of this period who contributed 
to the intellectual life of their time were churchmen. The laity 
in the Middle Ages slowly built up a vigorous political and 
economic system, but their activities were in a sense blind. There 
was in the later Middle Ages an important lay literature, very 
different from that of the Church ; in a general history, this litera- 
ture would demand more consideration than is called for in a 
history of philosophic thought. It is not until we come to Dante 
that we find a layman writing with full knowledge of the ecclesi- 
astical philosophy of his time. Until the fourteenth century, 
ecclesiastics have a virtual monopoly of philosophy, and philo- 
sophy, accordingly, is written from the standpoint of the Church. 
For this reason, medieval thought cannot be made intelligible 
without a fairly extensive account of the growth of ecclesiastical 
institutions, and especially of the papacy. 

The medieval world, as contrasted with the world of antiquity, 
is characterized by various forms of dualism. There is the dualisr 
of clergy and laity, the dualism of Latin and Teuton, the duali' 
of the kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this world, the c* 
ism of the spirit and the flesh. All these are exemplified ' 
dualism of Pope and Emperor. The dualism of Latin and 
an outcome of the barbarian invasion, but the others 
sources. The relations of clergy and laity, for the 
were to be modelled on the relations of Samuel and 
demand for the supremacy of the clergy arose out 
of Arian or semi-Arian emperors and kings. The d 
kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this world i* 
New Testament, but was systematized in Saint t ^ c dark 
of God. The dualism of the spirit and the flesh ' ct i v ity was 
Plato, and was emphasized by the Neoplatoni?* me to the 
in the teaching of St. Paul; and it domir^ nstan 
asceticism of the fourth and fifth centuries. 

Catholic philosophy is divided into 
ages, during which, in Western Europe, 
almost non-existent. From the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

wars of Byzantines and Lombards destroyed most of what re- 
mained of the civilization of Italy. The Arabs conquered most of 
the territory of the Eastern Empire, established themselves in 
Africa and Spain, threatened France, and even, on one occasion, 
sacked Rome. The Danes and Normans caused havoc in France 
and England, in Sicily and Southern Italy. Life, throughout these 
centuries, was precarious and full of hardship. Bad as it was in 
reality, gloomy superstitions made it even worse. It was thought 
that the great majority even of Christians would go to hell. At 
every moment, men felt themselves encompassed by evil spirits, 
and exposed to the machinations of sorcerers and witches. No joy 
of life was possible, except, in fortunate moments, to those who 
retained the thoughtlessness of children. The general misery 
heightened the intensity of religious feeling. The life of the good 
here below was a pilgrimage to the heavenly city; nothing of value 
was possible in the sublunary world except the steadfast virtue 
that would lead, in the end, to eternal bliss. The Greeks, in their 
great days, had found joy and beauty in the everyday world. 
Empedocles, apostrophizing his fellow-citizens, says: " Friends, 
that inhabit the great city looking down on the yellow rock of 
Acragas, up by the citadel, busy in goodly works, harbour of 
honour for the stranger, men unskilled in meanness, all hail." In 
later times, until the Renaissance, men had no such simple happi- 
ness in the visible world, but turned their hopes to the ur-*>' J 
Acragas is replaced in their love by Jerusalem the Golden. lts t " e 
earthly happiness at last returned, the intensity of longin- nten ; sts 
other world grew gradually less. Men used the same \ f *" e 
with a less profound sincerity. *; 

In the attempt to make the genesis and significance stian reve ' 
philosophy intelligible, I have found it necessary to challenged 
space to general history than is demanded in connects- * systems 
ancient or modern philosophy. Catholic philoy^^' * n the * on 8 
the philosophy of an institution, namel ""stake, but in the 
modern philosophy, even when it r -** v;Cess * u *' 
concerned with problems, espec* 8 ' which had an air of complete- 
which are derived from Christ :J b X a vanet y of cause8 - Perhaps 
Catholic doctrines as to thtV 2 * thc 8 rowth of a rich commercial 
Graeco-Ror/*n paganism tl Hewhene. The feudal aristocracy, in 
Christian, from the very begi' * tu P ld - and barbaric; the common 
or, in political terms, to Chur^ rch M superior to the nobles in 

3*4 



INTRODUCTION 

The problems raised by this dual loyalty were, for the most 
part, worked out in practice before the philosophers supplied the 
necessary theory. In this process there were two very distinct 
stages: one before the fall of the Western Empire, and one after 
it. The practice of a long line of bishops, culminating in St. 
Ambrose, supplied the basis for St. Augustine's political philo- 
sophy. Then came the barbarian invasion, followed by a long time 
of confusion and increasing ignorance. Between Boethius and 
St. Anselm, a period of over five centuries, there is only one 
eminent philosopher, John the Scot, and he, as an Irishman, had 
largely escaped the various processes that were moulding the rest 
of the Western world. But this period, in spite of the absence of 
philosophers, was not one during which there was no intellectual 
development. Chaos raised urgent practical problems, which were 
dealt with by means of institutions and modes of thought that 
dominated scholastic philosophy, and are, to a great extent, still 
important at the present day. These institutions and modes of 
thought were not introduced to the world by theorists, but by 
practical men in the stress of conflict. The moral reform of the 
Church in the eleventh century, which was the immediate prelude 
to the scholastic philosophy, was a reaction against the increasing 
absorption of the Church into the feudal system. To understand 
the scholastics we must understand Hil deb rand, and to understand 
1 ^Mebrand we must know something of the evils against which 

.. Attended. Nor can we ignore the foundation of the Holy 
mediex .**,. & T - ^ i_ 

. , Empire and its effect upon European thought. 

S u- ! * i^Js* 5 reasons, the reader will find in the following pages 
this svntfiC . , , - t f i - . i 

rf * |piastical and political history of which the relevance to 
1 he moi f . ., , . , i , . ,. , 

,|ment of philosophic thought may not be immediately 

I . I is the more necessary to relate something of this 
only rendcf . . . . . J . , . f & ... 

Tl h period concerned is obscure, and is unfamiliar to 

\ . . *^* nt home with both ancient and modern history, 
out western huru> . . , , , . ~ , 

, . . : - ^phers have had as much influence on philo- 

when the general level c. , ~ , , . T<1 , ' r , 

i 11 j ^t. r L %h rose, Charlemagne, and Hiidebrand. 
lull during the fourth century, . ' . / , 6 ' , , . . 
u \\r * r i *u * u nin fe these men and their times 
the Western Empire and the estab T r 

. . f * . rr, ,;v adequate treatment of our 

out its former territory. The culm. ^ 

late Roman civilization depended, 
condition of destitute refugees; the 
their rural estates. Fresh shocks cor 
without any sufficient breathing $rt 

125 ] 



Part i . The Fathers 



Chapter I 

THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE JEWS 

^ | -1HE Christian religion, as it was handed over by the late 

I Roman Empire to the barbarians, consisted of three ele- 

JL ments: first, certain philosophical beliefs, derived mainly 

from Plato and the Neoplatonists, but also in part from the Stoics; 

second, a conception of morals and history derived from the Jews ; 

and third, certain theories, more especially as to salvation, which 

were on the whole new in Christianity, though in part traceable 

to Orphism, and to kindred cults of the Near East. 
The most important Jewish elements in Christianity appear to 

me to be the following: 

1. A sacred history, beginning with the Creation, leading to a 
consummation in the future, and justifying the ways of Q . 

man ' i . f f , *** the unseen. 

2. The existence of a small section of man* e Q^J^ When 

specially loves. For Jews, this section was the. of , . for thc 
Christians, the elect. uged tf Mme * V0rd8> but 

3. A new conception of nghteoi 

giving, for example, was taken o^ and significance O f Catholic 
Judaism. The importance attache^ h nec lo ^. otc more 

from Orphism or from onent emanded in ^^n ^ th cithcr 
practical philanthropy, as a /h Catholjc hilocj phy is essentially 
of virtue, seems to have cof tution> MIW>V thc Catholic Church; 

4. The Law. Chnstiami^jj ; , IS t ar f rom orthodox, is largely 
instance the Decalogue, wL^feUy in ethics and political theory 
ritual parts. But in practice ^, an views of the moral law and froin 
same feelings that the Jew* relations of Church and State. In 
the doctrine that correct beliere is no such dual loyalty as the 
action, a doctrine which is esnning, has owed to God and Caesar, 
origin is the exclusiveness of -h and State. 



THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OP THE JEWS 

5. The Messiah. The Jews believed that the Messiah would 
bring them temporal prosperity, and victory over their enemies 
here on earth ; moreover, he remained in the future. For Christians, 
the Messiah was the historical Jesus, who was also identified with 
the Logos of Greek philosophy; and it was not on earth, but in 
heaven, that the Messiah was to enable his followers to triumph 
over their enemies. 

6. The Kingdom of Heaven. Other-worldliness is a conception 
which Jews and Christians, in a sense, share with later Platonism, 
but it takes, with them, a much more concrete form than with 
(I reek philosophers. The Greek doctrine which is to be found 
in much Christian philosophy, but not in popular Christianity 
was that the sensible world, in space and time, is an illusion, and 
that, by intellectual and moral discipline, a man can learn to live 
in the eternal world, which alone is real. The Jewish and Christian 
doctrine, on the other hand, conceived the Other World as not 
metaphysically different from this world, but as in the future, when 
the virtuous would enjoy everlasting bliss and the wicked would 
suffer everlasting torment. This belief embodied revenge psy- 
chology, and was intelligible to all and sundry, as the doctrines 
of Greek philosophers were not. 

' r o understand the origin of these beliefs, we must take account 



..-.. . '" facts in Jewish history, to which we will now turn our 
Hildebranu 

he contended. , ^ of lhe Israc i ites ^^^ be con fi r med from any 
Roman Lmpire an>v,, d Testamen t, and it is impossible to know at 
tor these reasons, * - . urelv legendary. David and Solomon 
much ecclesiastical and polit ' bablv had a real existence, but 
the development .of ph.losophi, w CQme to somethi ^^ 
evident. It is the more nect ki doms of Israe , and Judah . 
history as the period concerned . Q , d Testamem of whom there 
many who are at home with both of Ittac , who u ken 
I-ew technical philosophers have had a A^yrf^ finally conquered 
sopluc thought as St. Ambrose, Cha; nd remoyed . rf 

lo relate what is essential concerning dom of Judah a , one 
is therefore indispensable in any i tion . The kingdom of Judah 
8U ' ec ' ower came to an end with the 

.lians and Medes in 606 B.C. 
aptured Jerusalem, destroyed 
t of the population to Babylon. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The Babylonian kingdom fell in 538 B.C., when Babylon was taken 
by Cyrus, king of the Medes and Persians. Cyrus, in 537 B.C., 
issued an edict allowing the Jews to return to Palestine. Many of 
them did so, under the leadership of Nehemiah and Ezra; die 
Temple was rebuilt, and Jewish orthodoxy began to be crystallized. 

In the period of the captivity, and for some time before and 
after this period, Jewish religion went through a very important 
development. Originally, there appears to have been not very 
much difference, from a religious point of view, between the 
Israelites and surrounding tribes. Yahweh was, at first, only a 
tribal god who favoured the children of Israel, but it was not 
denied that there were other gods, and their worship was habitual. 
When the first Commandment says "Thou shall have none other 
gods but me," it is saying something which was an innovation 
in the time immediately preceding the captivity. This is made 
evident by various texts in the earlier prophets. It was the 
prophets at this time who first taught that the worship of heathen 
gods was sin. To win the victory in the constant wars of that time, 
they proclaimed, the favour of Yahweh was essential ; and Yahweh 
would withdraw his favour if other gods were also honoured. 
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, especially, seem to have invented the idea 
that all religions except one are false, and that the Lord punishes 
idolatry. 

Some quotations will illustrate their teachings, and the pre- 
valence of the heathen practices against which they protested. 
"Seest Thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the 
streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, and the fathers 
kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes 
to the queen of heaven [Ishtar], and pour out drink offerings unto 
other gods, that they may provoke me to anger." 1 The Ix>rd is 
angry about it. "And they have built the high places of Tophct, 
which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons 
and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, 
neither came it into my heart." 2 

There is a very interesting passage in Jeremiah in which he 
denounces the Jews in Kgypt for their idolatry. He himself had 
lived among them for a time. The prophet tells the Jewish refugees 
in Egypt that Yahweh will destroy them all because their wives 
have burnt incense to other gods. But they refuse to listen to him, 

1 Jeremiah vii, 17-18. * Jbid. t vii, 31. 

330 



THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF THE JEWS 

saying: "We will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out 
of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and 
to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our 
fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in 
the streets of Jerusalem ; for then had we plenty of victuals, and 
were well, and saw no evil." But Jeremiah assures them that 
Yahweh noticed these idolatrous practices, and that misfortune 
has come because of them. "Behold, I have sworn by my great 
name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in 
the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt. . . . 
I will watch over them for evil, and not for good; and all the 
men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by 
the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them." 1 

Iv/ckiel is equally shocked by the idolatrous practices of the 
Jews. The Ix>rd in a vision shows him women at the north gate of 
the temple weeping for Tammuz (a Babylonian deity); then He 
shows him "greater abominations," five and twenty men at the 
door of the temple worshipping the sun. The Lord declares: 
"Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare, 
neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a 
loud voice, yet will I not hear them." 2 

The idea that all religions but one are wicked, and that the 
Lord punishes idolatry, was apparently invented by these prophets. 
The prophets, on the whole, were fiercely nationalistic, and looked 
forward to the day when the Ix>rd would utterly destroy the 
gentiles. 

The captivity was taken to justify the denunciations of the 
prophets. If Yahweh was all-powerful, and the Jews were his 
Chosen People, their sufferings could only be explained by their 
wickedness. The psychology is that of paternal correction: the 
Jews are to be purified by punishment. Under the influence of this 
belief, they developed, in exile, an orthodoxy much more rigid and 
much more nationally exclusive than that which had prevailed while 
they were independent. The Jews who remained behind and were 
not transplanted to Babylon did not undergo this development 
to anything like the same extent. When Ezra and Nehemiah came 
back to Jerusalem after the captivity, they were shocked to find 
that mixed marriages had been common, and they dissolved all 
such marriages. 3 

1 Jeremiah xliv, ii-cnd. ' Kzckiel vii, ii-cnd. * Ezra ix-x, 5. 

33' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

in our version of the Apocrypha. The morality taught is very 
mundane. Reputation among neighbours is highly prized. Honesty 
is the best policy, because it is useful to have Yahweh on your 
side. Almsgiving is recommended. The only sign of Greek influence 
is in the praise of medicine. 

Slaves must not be treated too kindly. "Fodder, a wand, and 
burdens, are for the ass: and bread, correction, and work, for a 
servant. ... Set him to work, as is fit for him: if he be not 
obedient, put on more heavy fetters"(xxiii, 24, 28). At the same 
time, remember that you have paid a price for him, and that if 
he runs away you will lose your money; this sets a limit to pro- 
fitable severity (ibid., 30, 31). Daughters are a great source of 
anxiety; apparently in the writer's day they were much addicted to 
immorality (xlii, 9-11). He has a low opinion of women: "From 
garments cometh a moth, and from women wickedness" (ibid., 13). 
It is a mistake to be cheerful with your children ; the right course 
is to "bow down their neck from their youth" (vii. 23, 24). 

Altogether, like the elder Cato, he represents the morality of 
the virtuous business man in a very unattractive li^ht. 

This tranquil existence ot comfortable self-righteousness was 
rudely interrupted by the Scleucid king Amiochus IV, who was 
determined to hellenize all his dominions. In 175 B.C. he estab- 
lished a gymnasium in Jerusalem, and taught young men to ucar 
Greek hats and practise athletics. In this he was helped by a 
hellenizing Jew named Jason, whom he made high priest. The 
priestly aristocracy had become lax, and had felt the attraction 
of Greek civilization; but they were vehemently opposed by a 
party called the "Hasidim" (meaning "Holy"), who were strong 
among the rural population. 1 When, in 170 B.C., Antiochus 
became Involved in war with ligypt, the Jews rebelled. Thereupon 
Antiochus took the holy vessels from the Temple, and placed in 
it the image of the God. He identified Yahweh with Zeus, 
following a practice \\hich had been successful ever)' where else.* 
He resolved to extirpate the Jewish religion, and to stop circum- 

1 From them, probably, dc \eloped the sect of the Kssenes, whose 
doctrines seem to have influenced primitive Christianity. Sec Ocstcrlcy 
and Robinson, Ilutury of Israel, Vol. II, p. 323 II. The Pharisee* also 
descended from them. 

9 Some Alexandrian Jew* did not object to this identification. See 
Letter uf Aris teas t 15, 16. 

334 



THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF THE JEWS 

cision and the observance of the laws relating to food. To all this 
Jerusalem submitted, but outside Jerusalem the Jews resisted 
with the utmost stubbornness. 

The history of this period is told in the First Book of Maccabees. 
The first chapter tells how Antiochus decreed that all the in- 
habitants of his kingdom should be one people, and abandon their 
separate laws. All the heathen obeyed, and many of the Israelites, 
although the king commanded that they should profane the 
sabbath, sacrifice swine's flesh, and leave their children uncir- 
cumcised. All who disobeyed were to suffer death. Many, neverthe- 
less, resisted. "They put to death certain women, that had caused 
their children to be circumcised. And they hanged the infants 
about their necks, and rifled their houses, and slew them that had 
circumcised them. Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved 
and confirmed in themselves not to eat any unclean thing. Where- 
fore they chose rather to die, that they might not be defiled with 
meats, and that they might not profane the holy covenant: so then 
they died." 1 

It was at this time that the doctrine of immortality came to be 
widely believed among the Jews. It had been thought that virtue 
would be rewarded here on earth; but persecution, which fell 
upon the most virtuous, made it evident that this was not the case. 
In order to safeguard divine justice, therefore, it was necessary 
to believe in rewards and punishments hereafter. This doctrine 
was not universally accepted among the Jews; in the time of 
Christ, the Sadducees still rejected it. But by that time they 
were a small party, and in later times all Jews believed in immor- 
tality. 

The revolt against Antiochus was led by Judas Maccabaeus, an 
able military commander, who first recaptured Jerusalem (164 B.C.), 
and then embarked upon aggression. Sometimes he killed all the 
males, sometimes he circumcised them by force. His brother 
Jonathan was made high priest, was allowed to occupy Jerusalem 
with a garrison, and conquered part of Samaria, acquiring Joppa 
and Akra. He negotiated with Rome, and was successful in securing 
complete autonomy. His family were high priests until Herod, 
and are known as the I lasmonean dynasts. 

In enduring and resisting persecution the Jews of this time 
showed immense heroism, although in defence of things that do 
1 I Maccabees i, 60-3. 

335 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The New Testament writers are familiar with it; St. Jude con- 
siders it to be actually by Enoch. Early Christian Fathers, for 
instance Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian, treated it as 
canonical, but Jerome and Augustine rejected it. It fell, conse- 
quently, into oblivion, and was lost until, early in the nineteenth 
century, three manuscripts of it, in Ethiopic, were found in 
Abyssinia. Since then, manuscripts of parts of it have been found 
in Greek and Latin versions. It appears to have been originally 
written partly in Hebrew, partly in Aramaic. Its authors were 
members of the Hasidim, and their successors the Pharisees. It 
denounces kings and princes, meaning the Hasmonean dynasty 
and the Sadducees. It influenced New Testament doctrine, 
particularly as regards the Messiah, Sheol (hell), and demonology. 

The book consists mainly of "parables," which are more cosmic 
than those of the New Testament. There are visions of heaven 
and hell, of the Last Judgment, and so on ; one is reminded of the 
first two Books of Paradise Lost where the literary quality is good, 
and of Blake's Prophetic Books where it is inferior. 

There is an expansion of Genesis vi, 2, 4, which is curious and 
Promethean. The angels taught men metallurgy, and were punished 
for revealing ''eternal secrets." They were also cannibals. The 
angels that had sinned became pagan gods, and their women 
became sirens ; but at the last, they were punished with everlajtin^ 
torments. 

There are descriptions of heaven and hell which have consider- 
able literary merit. The Last Judgipent is performed by "the Son 
of Man, who hath righteousness" and who sits on the throne of 
His glory. Some of the gentiles, at the last, will repent and be 
forgiven; but most gentiles, and all hellenizing Jews, will suffer 
eternal damnation, for the righteous will pray for vengeance, and 
their prayer will be granted. 

There is a section on astronomy, where we learn that the sun 
and moon have chariots driven by the wind, that the year consists 
of 364 days, that human sin causes the heavenly bodies to depart 
from their courses, and that only the virtuous can know astronomy. 
Falling stars are falling angels, and are punished by the seven 
archangels. 

Next comes sacred history. Up to the Maccabees, this pursues 
the course known from the Bible in its earlier portions, and from 
history in the later parts. Then the author goes on into the future: 

338 



THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF THE JEWS 

the New Jerusalem, the conversion of the remnant of the gentiles, 
the resurrection of the righteous, and the Messiah. 

There is a great deal about the punishment of sinners and the 
reward of the righteous, who never display an attitude of Christian 
forgiveness towards sinners. "What will ye do, ye sinners, and 
whither will ye flee on that day of judgment, when ye hear the 
voice of the prayer of the righteous?" "Sin has not been sent upon 
the earth, but man of himself has created it." Sins are recorded 
in heaven. "Ye sinners shall be cursed for ever, and ye shall have 
no peace." Sinners may be happy all their lives, and even in 
dying, but their souls descend into Sheol, where they shall suffer 
"darkness and chains and a burning flame." But as for the 
righteous, "I and my Son will be united with them for ever." 

The last words of the book are: "To the faithful he will give 
faithfulness in the habitation of upright paths. And they shall see 
those who were born in darkness led into darkness, while the 
righteous shall be resplendent. And the sinners shall cry aloud 
and see them resplendent, and they indeed will go where days and 
seasons are prescribed for them." 

Jews, like Christians, thought much about sin, but few of them 
thought of themselves as sinners. This was, in the main, a Christian 
innovation, introduced by the parable of the Pharisee and the 
publican, and taucht as a virtue in Christ's denunciations of the 
Scribes and Pharisees. The Christians endeavoured to practise 
Christian humility; the Jews, in general, did not. 

There are, however, important exceptions among orthodox Jews 
just before the lime of Christ. Take, for instance, "The Testaments 
ill" the Twelve Patriarchs/ 1 written between 109 and 107 B.C. by 
a Pharisee who admired John Hyrcanus, a high priest of the 
Ihusmonean dynasty. This book, in the form in which we have it, 
contains Christian interpolations, but these are all concerned with 
dogma. When they are excised, the ethical teaching remains closely 
similar to that of the ( jnspels. As the Rev. Dr. R. H. Charles says: 
"The Sermon on the Mount reflects in several instances the spirit 
and even reproduces the very phrases of our text: many passages 
in tlir (iospcls exhibit traces of the same, and St. Paul seems to 
have used the book as a vade mecuin" (op. '/., pp. 291-2). We 
lind in this hook such preempts as the following: 

"Love ye one another from the heart; and if a man sin against 
thec, speak peaceably to him, and in thy soul hold not guile; and 

339 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

if he repent and confess, forgive him. But if he deny it, do not 
get into a passion with him, lest catching the poison from thee 
he take to swearing, and so then sin doubly. . . . And if he be 
shameless and persist in wrong-doing, even so forgive him from 
the heart, and leave to God the avenging." 

Dr. Charles is of opinion that Christ must have been acquainted 
with this passage. Again we find : 

"Love the Lord and your neighbour." 

"Love the Lord through all your life, and one another with a 
true heart." 

"I love the Lord; likewise also every man with all my heart." 
These are to be compared with Matthew xxii, 37-39. There is a 
reprobation of all hatred in "The Testaments of the Twelve 
Patriarchs"; for instance: 

"Anger is blindness, and docs not suffer one to see the face of 
any man with truth." 

"Hatred, therefore, is evil; for it constantly matcth with lying." 
The author of this book, as might be expected, holds that not only 
the Jews, but all the gentiles, will be saved. 

Christians have learnt from the Gospels to think ill of Pharisees, 
yet the author of this book was a Pharisee, and he taught, as we 
have seen, those very ethical maxims which we think of as most 
distinctive of Christ's preaching. The explanation, however, is 
not difficult. In the first place, he must have been, even in his own 
day, an exceptional Pharisee; the more usual doctrine was, no 
doubt, that of the Book of Enoch. In the second place, we know 
that all movements tend to ossify ; who could infer the principles 
of Jefferson from those of the Daughters of the American Revo- 
lution? In the third place, we know, as regards the Pharisees in 
particular, that their devotion to the Law, as the absolute and 
final truth, soon put an end to all fresh and living thought and 
feeling among them. As Dr. Charles says: 

"When Pharisaism, breaking with the ancient ideals of its party, 
committed itself to political interests and movements, and con- 
currently therewith surrendered itself more and more wholly to 
the study of the letter of the Law, it soon ceased to offer scope for 
the development of such a lofty system of ethics as the Testaments 
[of the Patriarchs] attest, and so the true successors of the early 
Hasids and their teaching quitted Judaism and found their natural 
home in the bosom of primitive Christianity." 

340 



THE RELIGIOUS DEVELOPMENT OF THE JEWS 

After a period of rule by the High Priests, Mark Antony made 
his friend Herod King of the Jews. Herod was a gay adventurer, 
often on the verge of bankruptcy, accustomed to Roman society, 
and very far removed from Jewish piety. His wife was of the 
family of the high priests, but he was an Idumaean, which alone 
would suffice to make him an object of suspicion to the Jews. He 
was a skilful time-server, and deserted Antony promptly when it 
became evident that Octavius was going to be victorious. However, 
he made strenuous attempts to reconcile the Jews to his rule. He 
rebuilt the Temple, though in a hellenistic style, with rows of 
Corinthian pillars; but he placed over the main gate a large 
golden eagle, thereby infringing the second Commandment. When 
it was rumoured that he was dying, the Pharisees pulled down the 
eagle, but he, in revenge, caused a number of them to be put to 
death. He died in 4 B.C., and soon after his death the Romans 
abolished the kingship, putting Judea under a procurator. Pontius 
Pilate, who became procurator in A.U. 26, was tactless, and was 
soon retired. 

In A.D. 66, the Jews, led by the party of the Zealots, rebelled 
against Rome. They were defeated, and Jerusalem was captured 
in A.D. 70. The Temple was destroyed, and few Jews were left in 
Judea. 

The Jews of the Dispersion had become important centuries 
before this time. The Jews had been originally an almost wholly 
agricultural people, but they learnt trading from the Babylonians 
during the captivity. Many of them remained in Babylon after the 
time of lizra and Nehemiah, and among these some were very 
rich. After the foundation of Alexandria, great numbers of Jews 
settled in that city; they had a special quarter assigned to them, 
not as a ghetto, but to keep them from danger of pollution by 
contact with gentiles. The Alexandrian Jews became much more 
hellenized than those of Judea, and forgot Hebrew. For this reason 
it became necessary to translate the Old Testament into Greek; 
the result was the Septuagint. The Pentateuch was translated in 
the middle of the third century B.C.; the other parts somewhat 
later. 

Legends arose about the Septuagint, so called because it was 
the work of seventy translators. It was said that each of the 
seventy translated the whole independently, and that when the 
versions were compared they were found to be identical down to 



Chapter II 

CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR 

CENTURIES 

CHRISTIANITY, at first, was preached by Jews to Jews, as 
a reformed Judaism. St. James, and to a lesser extent St. 
Peter, wished it to remain no more than this, and they 
might have prevailed but for St. Paul, who was determined to 
admit gentiles without demanding circumcision or submission to 
the Mosaic Law. The contention between the two factions is 
related in the Acts of the Apostles, from a Pauline point of view. 
The communities of Christians that St. Paul established in many 
places, were, no doubt, composed partly of converts from among 
the Jews, partly of gentiles seeking a new religion. The certainties 
of Judaism made it attractive in that age of dissolving faiths, but 
circumcision was an obstacle to the conversion of men. The ritual 
laws in regard to food were also inconvenient. These two obstacles, 
even if there had been no others, would have made it almost im- 
possible for the Hebrew religion to become universal. Christianity, 
owing to St. Paul, retained what was attractive in the doctrines of 
the Jews, without the features that gentiles found hardest to 
assimilate. 

The view that the Jews were the Chosen People remained, how- 
ever, obnoxious to Greek pride. This view was radically rejected 
by the Gnostics. They, or at least some of them, held that the 
sensible world had been created by an inferior deity named 
laldabaoth, the rebellious son of Sophia (heavenly wisdom). He, 
they said, is the Yahweh of the Old Testament, while the serpent, 
so far from being wicked, was engaged in warning Eve against 
his deceptions. For a long time, the supreme deity allowed lalda- 
baoth free play; at last lie sent His Son to inhabit temporarily 
the body of the man Jesus, and to liberate the world from the false 
teaching of Moses. Those who held this view, or something like 
it, combined it, as a rule, with a Platonic philosophy; Plotinus, 
as we saw, found some difficulty in refuting it. Gnosticism afforded 
a half-way house between philosophic paganism and Christianity, 
for, while it honoured Christ, it thought ill of the Jews. The 
same was true, later, of Manichaeism, through which St. Augustine 

344 



CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES 

came to the Catholic Faith. Manichseism combined Christian and 
Zoroastrian elements, teaching that evil is a positive principle, 
embodied in matter, while the good principle is embodied in 
spirit. It condemned meat-eating, and all sex, even in marriage. 
Such intermediate doctrines helped much in the gradual con- 
version of cultivated men of Greek speech; but the New Testa- 
ment warns true believers against them: "O Timothy, keep that 
which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain 
babblings, and oppositions of science [Gnosis] falsely so called: 
which some professing have erred concerning the faith." 1 

Gnostics and Manichaeans continued to flourish until the govern- 
ment became Christian. After that time they were led to conceal 
their beliefs, but they still had a subterranean influence. One of the 
doctrines of a certain sect of Gnostics was adopted by Mohammed. 
They taught that Jesus was a mere man, and that the Son of God 
descended upon him at the baptism, and abandoned him at the 
time of the Passion. In support of this view they appealed to 
the text: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 2 
a text which, it must be confessed, Christians have always found 
difficult. The Gnostics considered it unworthy of the Son of God 
to be born, to be an infant, and, above all, to die on the cross; 
they said that these things had befallen the man Jesus, but not 
the divine Son of God. Mohammed, who recognized Jesus as a 
prophet, though not as divine, had a strong class feeling that 
prophets ought not to come to a bad end. He therefore adopted 
the view of the Docetics (a Gnostic sect), according to which it 
was a mere phantom that hung upon the cross, upon which, 
impotently and ignorantly, Jews and Romans wreaked their 
ineffectual vengeance. In this way, something of Gnosticism 
passed over into the orthodox doctrine of Islam. 

The attitude of Christians to contemporary Jews early became 
hostile. The received view was that God had spoken to the patri- 
archs and prophets, who were holy men, and had foretold the 
coming of Christ; but when Christ came, the Jews failed to 
recognize Him, and were thenceforth to be accounted wicked. 
Moreover Christ had abrogated the Mosaic Law, substituting the 
two commandments to love God and our neighbour; this, also, 
the Jews perversely failed to recognize. As soon as the State 
became Christian, anti-Semitism, in its medieval form, began, 

1 I Timothy vi, ao, ai. ' Mark xxv, 34. 

345 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

nominally as a manifestation of Christian zeal. How far the 
economic motives, by which it was inflamed in later times, operated 
in the Christian Empire, it seems impossible to ascertain. 

In proportion as Christianity became hellenized, it became theo- 
logical. Jewish theology was always simple. Yahweh developed 
from a tribal deity into the sole omnipotent God who created 
heaven and earth ; divine justice, when it was seen not to confer 
earthly prosperity upon the virtuous, was transferred to heaven, 
which entailed belief in immortality. But throughout its evolution 
the Jewish creed involved nothing complicated and metaphysical ; 
it had no mysteries, and every Jew could understand it. 

This Jewish simplicity, on the whole, still characterizes the 
synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke), but has already 
disappeared in St. John, where Christ is identified with the 
Platonic-Stoic Logos. It is less Christ the Man than Christ 'the 
theological figure that interests the fourth evangelist. This is still 
more true of the Fathers; you mil find, in their writings, many 
more allusions to St. John than to the other three gospels put 
together. The Pauline epistles also contain much theology, espe- 
cially as regards salvation; at the same time they show a con- 
siderable acquaintance with Greek culture a quotation from 
Menander, an allusion to Epimenides the Cretan who said that 
all Cretans are liars, and so on. Nevertheless St. Paul 1 says: 
"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit." 

The synthesis of Greek philosophy and Hebrew scriptures 
remained more or less haphazard and fragmentary until the time 
of Origen (A.D. 185-254). Origen, like Philo, lived in Alexandria, 
which, owing to commerce and the university, was, from its 
foundation to its fall, the chief centre of learned syncretism. Like 
his contemporary Plotinus, he was a pupil of Ammonius Saccas, 
whom many regard as the founder of Neoplatonisrn. His doctrines, 
as set forth in his work De Principtis, have much affinity to those 
of Plotinus more, in fact, than is compatible with orthodoxy. 

There is, Origen says, nothing wholly incorporeal except God 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The stars are living rational beings, 
to whom God has given souls that were already in existence. The 
sun, he thinks, can sin. The souls of men, as Plato taught, come 
to them at birth from elsewhere, having existed ever since the 
1 Or rather the author of an Epistle attributed to St. Paul Coiosaians ii,8. 

34 6 



CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES 

Creation. Nous and soul are distinguished more or less as in 
Plotinus. When Nous falls away, it becomes soul; soul, when 
virtuous, becomes Nous. Ultimately all spirits will become wholly 
submissive to Christ, and will then be bodiless. Even the devil 
will be saved at the last. 

Origen, in spite of being recognized as one of the Fathers, was, 
in later times, condemned as having maintained four heresies: 

1 . The pre-existence of souls, as taught by Plato. 

2. That the human nature of Christ, and not only His divine 
nature, existed before the Incarnation. 

3. That, at the resurrection, our bodies will be transformed 
into absolutely ethereal bodies. 

4. That all men, and even devils, shall be saved at the last. 

St. Jerome, who had expressed a somewhat unguarded admira- 
tion of Origen for his work in establishing the text of the Old 
Testament, found it prudent, subsequently, to expend much time 
and vehemence in repudiating his theological errors. 

Origen 's aberrations were not only theological; in his youth he 
was guilty of an irreparable error through a too literal interpreta- 
tion of the text: "There be eunuchs, which have made themselves 
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake." 1 This method of 
escaping the temptations of the flesh, which Origen rashly adopted, 
had been condemned by the Church; moreover it made him 
ineligible for holy orders, although some ecclesiastics seem to have 
thought otherwise, thereby giving rise to unedifying controversies. 

Origen *s longest work is a book entitled Against Celsus. Celsus 
was the author of a book (now lost) against Christianity, and 
Origen set to work to answer him point by point. Celsus begins 
by objecting to Christians because they belong to illegal associa- 
tions; this Origen does not deny, but claims to be a virtue, like 
tyrannicide. He then comes to what is no doubt the real basis for 
the dislike of Christianity: Christianity, says Celsus, comes from 
the Jews, who are barbarians; and only Greeks can extract sense 
out of the teachings of barbarians. Origen replies that anyone 
coming from Greek philosophy to the Gospels would conclude 
that they arc true, and supply a demonstration satisfying to the 
Greek intellect. But, further, "The Gospel has a demonstration 
of its own, more divine than any established by Grecian dialectics. 
And this diviner method is called by the apostle the 'manifestation 
1 Matthew xix, 12. 

347 



WBSTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of the Spirit and of power'; of 'the Spirit/ on account of the 
prophecies, which are sufficient to produce faith in any one who 
reads them, especially in those things which relate to Christ; and 
of 'power/ because of the signs and wonders which we must 
believe to have been performed, both on many other grounds, and 
on this, that traces of them are still preserved among those who 
regulate their lives by the precepts of the Gospel." 1 

This passage is interesting, as showing already the twofold argu- 
ment for belief which is characteristic of Christian philosophy. 
On the one hand, pure reason, rightly exercised, suffices to establish 
the essentials of the Christian faith, more especially God, im- 
mortality, and free will. But on the other hand the Scriptures 
prove not only these bare essentials, but much more; and the 
divine inspiration of the Scriptures is proved by the fact that the 
prophets foretold the coming of the Messiah, by the miracles, 
and by the beneficent effects of belief on the lives of the faithful. 
Some of these arguments are now considered out of date, but the 
last of them was still employed by William James. All of them, 
until the Renaissance, were accepted by even 1 Christian philo- 
sopher. 

Some of Origen's arguments are curious. He says that magicians 
invoke the "God of Abraham/' often without knowing who Ik- 
is; but apparently this invocation is specially potent. Names are 
essential in magic; it is not indifferent whether Coil is called by 
His Jewish, Egyptian, Babylonian, Greek, or Brahman name. 
Magic formulae lose their efficacy- when translated. (>nc is led to 
suppose that the magicians of the time used formulae from all 
known religions, but if Origen is right, those derived from Hebrew 
sources were the most effective. The argument is the more curious 
as he points out that Moses forbade sorcery. 2 

Christians, we are told, should not take part in the government 
of the State, but only of the "divine nation, " i.e., the Church. 3 
This doctrine, of course, was somewhat modified after the time 
of Constantine, but something of it survived. It is implicit in St. 
Augustine's City of God. It led churchmen, at the time of the 
fall of the Western Empire, to look on passively at secular disasters, 
while they exercised their very great talents in Church discipline, 

1 Origen, Contra Celsum, Book I, chap. ti. 
1 Ibid., Book I, chap. xxvi. 
., Book VIII, chap. bcxv 

348 



CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES 

theological controversy, and the spread of monasticism. Some 
trace of it still exists: most people regard politics as "worldly" 
and unworthy of any really holy man. 

Church government developed slowly during the first three 
centuries, and rapidly after the conversion of Constantino. Bishops 
were popularly elected; gradually they acquired considerable 
power over Christians in their own dioceses, but before Con- 
stant ine there was hardly any form of central government over 
the whole Church. The power of bishops in great cities was 
enhanced by the practice of almsgiving: the offerings of the 
faithful were administered by the bishop, who could give or with- 
hold charity to the poor. There came thus to be a mob of the 
destitute, ready to do the bishop's will. When the State became 
Christian, the bishops were given judicial and administrative 
functions. There came also to be a central government, at least 
in matters of doctrine. Constantine was annoyed by the quarrel 
between Catholics and Arians; having thrown in his lot with the 
Christians he wanted them to be a united part)'. For the purpose 
of healing dissensions, he caused the convening of the oecumenical 
Council of Nicara, which drew up the Xicene Creed, 1 and, so 
far as the Arian controversy was concerned, determined for all 
lime the standard of orthodoxy. Other later controversies were 
similarly decided by oecummical councils, until the division 
between Kast and West and the Kastern refusal to admit the 
authority of the POJX* made them impossible. 

The i'ope, though officially the most important individual in 
ihc Church, had no authority over the Church as a whole until a 
much later period. The gradual growth of the papal power is a 
very interesting subject, which I shall deal with in later chapters. 

The growth of Christianity before Constantine, as well as the 
motives of his conversion, has been variously explained by various 
authors. Gibbon* assigns live causes: 

"I. The inflexible, and, if we may use the expression, the 
intolerant zeal of the Christians, derived, it is true, from the 
Jewish religion, but purified from the narrow and unsocial spirit 
which, instead of inviting, had deterred the Gentiles from em- 
bracing the law of Moses. 

"II. The doctrine of a future life, improved by every additional 
1 Not exactly in its present form, which was decided upon in 362. 
1 The Decline and Full <>/ the Ruman Empire, chap. xv. 

349 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

circumstance which could give weight and efficacy to that im- 
portant truth. 

"III. The miraculous powers ascribed to the primitive Church. 

"IV. The pure and austere morals of the Christians. 

"V. The union and discipline of the Christian republic, which 
gradually formed an independent and increasing State in the 
heart of the Roman empire." 

Broadly speaking, this analysis may be accepted, but with some 
comments. The first cause the inflexibility and intolerance 
derived from the Jews may be wholly accepted. We have seen 
in our own day the advantages of intolerance in propaganda. The 
Christians, for the most part, believed that they alone would go 
to heaven, and that the most awful punishments would, in the 
next world, fall upon the heathen. The other religions which 
competed for favour during the third century had not this threa- 
tening character. The worshippers of the Great Mother, for 
example, while they had a ceremony the Taurobolium which 
was analogous to baptism, did not teach that those who omitted 
it would go to hell. It may be remarked, incidentally, that the 
Taurobolium was expensive: a bull had to be killed, and its blood 
allowed to trickle over the convert. A rite of this sort is aristocratic, 
and cannot be the basis of a religion which is to embrace the 
great bulk of the population, rich and poor, free and slave. In 
such respects, Christianity had an advantage over all its rivals. 

As regards the doctrine of a future life, in the West it was first 
taught by the Orphics and thence adopted by Greek philosophers. 
The Hebrew prophets, some of them, taught the resurrection of 
the body, but it seems to have been from the Greeks that the Jews 
learnt to believe in the resurrection of the spirit. 1 The doctrine of 
immortality, in Greece, had a popular form in Orphism and a 
learned form in Platonism. The latter, being based upon difficult 
arguments, could not become widely popular; the Orphic form, 
however, probably had a great influence on the general opinions 
of later antiquity, not only among pagans, but also among Jews 
and Christians. Elements of mystery religions, both Orphic and 
Asiatic, enter largely into Christian theology; in all of them, the 
central myth is that of the dying god who rises again. 2 i think, 

1 See Oesterley and Robinson, I i threw Religion. 
1 See Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity 

35 



CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES 

therefore, that the doctrine of immortality must have had less 
to do with the spread of Christianity than Gibbon thought. 

Miracles certainly played a very large part in Christian propa- 
ganda. But miracles, in later antiquity, were very common, and 
were not the prerogative of any one religion. It is not altogether 
easy to see why, in this competition, the Christian miracles came 
to be more widely believed than those of other sects. I think 
Gibbon omits one very important matter, namely the possession 
of a Sacred Book. The miracles to which Christians appealed had 
begun in a remote antiquity, among a nation which the ancients 
felt to be mysterious; there was a consistent history, from the 
Creation onwards, according to which Providence had always 
worked wonders, first for the Jews, then for the Christians. To a 
modern historical student it is obvious that the early history of 
the Israelites is in the main legendary, but not so to the ancients. 
They believed in the Homeric account of the siege of Troy, in 
Romulus and Remus, and so on; why, asks Origen, should you 
accept these traditions and reject those of the Jews? To this 
argument there was no logical answer. It was therefore natural 
to accept Old Testament miracles, and, when they had been 
admitted, those of more recent date became credible, especially 
in view of the Christian interpretation of the prophets. 

The morals of the Christians, before Constantine, were un- 
doubtedly very superior to those of average pagans. The Christians 
were persecuted at times, and were almost always at a disadvantage 
in competition with pagans. They believed firmly that virtue 
would be rewarded in heaven and sin punished in hell. Their sexual 
ethics had a strictness that was rare in antiquity. Pliny, whose 
official duty it was to persecute them, testifies to their high moral 
character. After the conversion of Constantine,therewere, of course, 
time-servers among Christians; but prominent ecclesiastics, with 
some exceptions, continued to be men of inflexible moral principles. 
I think Gibbon is right in attributing great importance to this 
high moral level as one of the causes of the spread of Christianity. 

Gibbon puts last "the union and discipline of the Christian 
republic." I think that, from a political point of view, this was the 
most important of his five causes. In the modern world, we are 
accustomed to political organization; every politician has to reckon 
with the Catholic vote, but it is balanced by the vote of other or- 
ganized groups. A Catholic candidate for the American Presidency 

35' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

is at a disadvantage, because of Protestant prejudice. But, if there 
were no such thing as Protestant prejudice, a Catholic candidate 
would stand a better chance than any other. This seems to have 
been Constantino's calculation. The support of the Christians, as 
a single organized bloc, was to be obtained by favouring them. 
Whatever dislike of the Christians existed was unorganized and 
politically ineffective. Probably Rostovtseff is right in holding 
that a large part of the army was Christian, and that this was 
what most influenced Constantino. However that may be, the 
Christians, while still a minority, had a kind of organization which 
was then new, though now common, and which gave them all 
the political influence of a pressure group to which no other 
pressure groups are opposed. This was the natural consequence 
of their virtual monopoly of zeal, and their zeal was an inheritance 
from the Jews. 

Unfortunately, as soon as the Christians acquired political 
power, they turned their zeal against each other. There had been 
heresies, not a few, before Constantine, but the orthodox had 
had no means of punishing them. When the State became Chris- 
tian, great prizes, in the shape of power and wealth, became open 
to ecclesiastics; there were disputed elections, and theological 
quarrels were also quarrels for worldly advantages. Constantine 
himself preserved a certain degree of neutrality in the disputes of 
theologians, but after his death (337) his successors (except for 
Julian the Apostate) were, in a greater or less degree, favourable 
to the Arians, until the accession of Theodosius in 379. 

The hero of this period is Athanasius (ca. 297-373), who was 
throughout his long life the most intrepid champion of Nicene 
orthodoxy. 

The period from Constantine to the Council of Chalceclon (451) 
is peculiar owing to the political importance of theology. Two 
questions successively agitated the Christian world: first, the 
nature of the Trinity, and then the doctrine of the Incarnation. 
Only the first of these was to the fore in the time of Athanasius. 
Anus, a cultivated Alexandrian priest, maintained that the Son 
is not the equal of the Father, but created by Him. At an earlier 
period, this view might not have aroused much antagonism, but 
in the fourth century most theologians rejected it. The view which 
finally prevailed was that the Father and the Son were equal, and 
of the same substance; they were, however, distinct Persons. The 

352 



CHRISTIANITY DURING THE FIRST FOUR CENTURIES 

view that they were not distinct, but only different aspects of one 
Being, was the Sabellian heresy, called after its founder Sabellius. 
Orthodoxy thus had to tread a narrow line: those who unduly 
emphasized the distinctness of the Father and the Son were in 
danger of Arianism, and those who unduly emphasized their 
oneness were in danger of Sabellianism. 

The doctrines of Arius were condemned by the Council of 
Nicaea (325) by an overwhelming majority. But various modifica- 
tions were suggested by various theologians, and favoured by 
Emperors. Athanasius, who was Bishop of Alexandria from 328 
till his death, was constantly in exile because of his zeal for Nicene 
orthodoxy. He had immense popularity in Egypt, which, through- 
out the controversy, followed him unwaveringly. It is curious that, 
in the course of theological controversy, national (or at least 
regional) feeling, which had seemed extinct since the Roman 
conquest, revived. Constantinople and Asia inclined to Arianism; 
Egypt was fanatically Athanasian; the West steadfastly adhered 
to the decrees of the Council of Nicaea. After the Arian controversy 
was ended, new controversies, of a more or less kindred sort, 
arose, in which Egypt became heretical in one direction and Syria 
in another. These heresies, which were persecuted by the orthodox, 
impaired the unity of the Eastern Empire, and facilitated the 
Mohammedan conquest. The separatist movements, in themselves, 
are not surprising, but it is curious that they should have been 
associated with vefy subtle and abstruse theological questions. 

The Emperors, from 335 to 378, favoured more or less Arian 
opinions as far as they dared, except for Julian the Apostate 
(361-363), who, as a pagan, was neutral as regards the internal 
disputes of the Christians. At last, in 379, the Emperor Theodosius 
gave his full support to the Catholics, and their victory throughout 
the Empire was complete. St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and St. 
Augustine, whom we shall consider in the next chapter, lived most 
of their lives during this period of Catholic triumph. It was 
succeeded, however, in the West, by another Arian domination, 
that of the Goths and Vandals, who, between them, conquered 
most of the Western Empire. Their power lasted for about a 
century, at the end of which it was destroyed by Justinian, the 
Lombards, and the Franks, of whom Justinian and the Franks, 
and ultimately the Lombards also, were orthodox. Thus at last 
the Catholic faith achieved definitive success. 

353 M 



Chapter III 
THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

FOUR men are called the Doctors of the Western Church: 
St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and Pope Gregory 
the Great. Of these the first three were contemporaries, 
while the fourth belonged to a later date. I shall, in this chapter, 
give some account of the life and times of the first three, reserving 
for a later chapter an account of the doctrines of St. Augustine, 
who is, for us, the most important of the three. 

Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine all flourished during the brief 
period between the victory of the Catholic Church in the Roman 
Empire and the barbarian invasion. All three were young during 
the reign of Julian the Apostate ; Jerome lived ten years after the 
sack of Rome by the Goths under Alaric ; Augustine lived till the 
irruption of the Vandals into Africa, and died while they were 
besieging Hippo, of which he was bishop. Immediately after their 
time, the masters of Italy, Spain, and Africa were not only bar- 
barians, but Arian heretics. Civilization declined for centuries, 
and it was not until nearly a thousand years later that Christendom 
again produced men who were their equals in learning and culture. 
Throughout the dark ages and the medieval period, their authority 
was revered; they, more than any other men, fixed the mould 
into which the Church was shaped. Speaking broadly, St. Ambrose 
determined the ecclesiastical conception of the relation of Church 
and State; St. Jerome gave the Western Church its Latin Bible 
and a great part of the impetus to monasticism ; while St. Augustine 
fixed the theology of the Church until the Reformation, and, later, 
a great part of the doctrines of Luther and Calvin. Few men have 
surpassed these three in influence on the course of history. The 
independence of the Church in relation to the secular State, as 
successfully maintained by St. Ambrose, was a new and revolu- 
tionary doctrine, which prevailed until the Reformation; when 
Hobbes combated it in the seventeenth century, it was against 
St. Ambrose that he chiefly argued. St. Augustine was in the fore- 
front of theological controversy during the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries, Protestants and Jansenists being for him, and 
orthodox Catholics against him. 

354 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

The capital of the Western Empire, at the end of the fourth 
century, was Milan, of which Ambrose was bishop. His duties 
brought him constantly into relations with the emperors, to whom 
he spoke habitually as an equal, sometimes as a superior. His 
dealings with the imperial court illustrate a general contrast 
characteristic of the times: while the State was feeble, incompetent, 
governed by unprincipled self-seekers, and totally without any* 
policy beyond that of momentary expedients, the Church was 
vigorous, able, guided by men prepared to sacrifice everything 
personal in its interests, and with a policy so far-sighted that 
it brought victory for the next thousand years. It is true that 
these merits were offset by fanaticism and superstition, but 
without these no reforming movement could, at that time, have 
succeeded. 

St. Ambrose had every opportunity to seek success in the service 
of the State. His father, also named Ambrose, was a high official 
prefect of the Gauls. The Saint was born, probably, at Treves, 
a frontier garrison town, where the Roman legions were stationed 
to keep the Germans at bay. At the age of thirteen he was taken 
to Rome, where he had a good education, including a thorough 
grounding in Greek. When he grew up he took to the law, in 
which he was very successful; and at the age of thirty he was 
made governor of Liguria and ^Emilia. Nevertheless, four years 
later he turned his back on secular government, and by popular 
acclaim became bishop of Milan, in opposition to an Arian candi- 
date. He gave all his worldly goods to the poor, and devoted the 
whole of the rest of his life to the service of the Church, sometimes 
at great personal risk. This choice was certainly not dictated by 
worldly motives, but, if it had been, it would have been wise. In 
the State, even if he had become Emperor, he could at that time 
have found no such scope for his administrative statesmanship as 
he found in the discharge of his episcopal duties. 

During the first nine years of Ambrose's episcopate, the 
Emperor of the West was Gratian, who was Catholic, virtuous, 
and careless. He was so devoted to the chase that he neglected 
the government, and in the end was assassinated. He was suc- 
ceeded, throughout most of the Western Empire, by a usurper 
named Maximus; but in Italy the succession passed to Gratian 's 
younger brother Valentinian II, who was still a boy. At first, the 
imperial power was exercised by his mother, Justina, widow of 

355 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the Emperor Valentinian I; but as she was an Arian, conflicts 
between her and St. Ambrose were inevitable. 

All the three Saints with whom we are concerned in this chapter 
wrote innumerable letters, of which many are preserved ; the con- 
sequence is that we know more about them than about any of 
the pagan philosophers, and more than about all but a few of the 
ecclesiastics of the Middle Ages. St. Augustine wrote letters to 
all and sundry, mostly on doctrine or Church discipline; St. 
Jerome's letters are mainly addressed to ladies, giving advice on 
how to preserve virginity ; but St. Ambrose's most important and 
interesting letters are to Emperors, telling them in what respects 
they have fallen short of their duty, or, on occasion, congratulating 
them on having performed it. 

The first public question with which Ambrose had to deal was 
that of the altar and statue of Victory in Rome. Paganism lingered 
longer among the senatorial families of the capital than it did 
elsewhere; the official religion was in the hands of an aristocratic 
priesthood, and was bound up with the imperial pride of the 
conquerors of the world. The statue of Victor}' in the Senate 
House had been removed by Constantius, the son of Constantine, 
and restored by Julian the Apostate. The Emperor Gratian again 
removed the statue, whereupon a deputation of the Senate, headed 
by Symmachus, prefect of the City, asked for its renewed 
restoration. 

Symmachus, who also played a part in the life of Augustine, 
was a distinguished member of a distinguished family rich, 
aristocratic, cultivated, and pagan. He was banished from Rome 
by Gratian in 382 for his protest against the removal of the statue 
of Victory, but not for long, as he was prefect of the City in 384. 
He was the grandfather of the Symmachus who was the father-in- 
law of Boethius, and who was prominent in the reign of Theodoric. 

The Christian senators objected, and by the help of Ambrose 
and the Pope (Damasus) their view was made to prevail with the 
Emperor. After the death of Gratian, Symmachus and the pagan 
senators petitioned the new Emperor, Valentinian II, in A.o. 384. 
In rebuttal of this renewed attempt, Ambrose wrote to the 
Emperor, setting forth the thesis that, as all Romans owed military 
service to their sovereign, so he (the Emperor) owed service to 
Almighty God. 1 "Let no one," he says, "take advantage of your 
1 This thesis seems to anticipate the outlook of feudalism. 

356 



THREE DOCTORS OP THE CHURCH 

youth ; if he be a heathen who demands this, it is not right that 
he should bind your mind with the bonds of his own superstition; 
but by his zeal he ought to teach and admonish you how to be 
zealous for the true faith, since he defends vain things with all 
the passion of truth." To be compelled to swear at the altar of an 
idol, he says, is, to a Christian, persecution. "If it were a civil 
cause the right of reply would be reserved for the opposing party; 
it is a religious cause, and I the bishop make a claim. . . . Certainly 
if anything else is decreed, we bishops cannot constantly suffer it 
and take no notice; you indeed may come to the Church, but will 
find either no priest there, or one who will resist you." 1 

The next epistle points out that the endowments of the Church 
serve purposes never served by the wealth of heathen temples. "The 
possessions of the Church are the maintenance of the poor. Let 
them count up how many captives the temples have ransomed, 
what food they have contributed for the poor, to what exiles they 
have supplied the means of living.** This was a telling argument, 
and one which was quite justified by Christian practice. 

St. Ambrose won his point, but a subsequent usurper, Eugenius, 
who favoured the heathen, restored the altar and statue. It was 
only after the defeat of Eugenius by Theodosius in 394 that the 
question was finally decided in favour of the Christians. 

The bishop was, at first, on very friendly terms with the imperial 
court, and was employed on a diplomatic mission to the usurper 
Maximus, who, it was feared, might invade Italy. Out before long 
a grave matter of controversy arose. The Empress Justina, as an 
Arian, requested that one church in Milan might be ceded to the 
Arians, but Ambrose refused. The people sided with him, and 
thronged the basilica in great crowds. Gothic soldiers, who were 
Arians, were sent to take possession, but fraternized with the 
people. "The Counts and Tribunes,' 1 he says in a spirited letter 
to his sister, 3 "came and urged me to cause the basilica to be 
quickly surrendered, saying that the Emperor was exercising his 
rights since everything was under his power. I answered that if 
he asked of me what was mine, that is, my land, my money, or 
whatever of this kind was my own, I would not refuse it, although 
all that I have belonged to the poor, but that those things which 
are God's are not subject to the imperial power. 'If my patrimony 
is required, enter upon it ; if my body, I will go at once. Do you 

1 Epistle xvii. Ibid. xx. 

357 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

wish to cast me into chains, or to give me to death ? It will be a 
pleasure to me. I will not defend myself with throngs of people, 
nor will I cling to the altars and entreat for my life, but will more 
gladly be slain myself for the altars.' I was indeed struck with 
horror when I learnt that armed men had been sent to take posses- 
sion of the basilica, lest while the people were defending the 
basilica, there might be some slaughter which would tend to the 
injury of the whole city. I prayed that I might not survive the 
destruction of so great a city, or it might be of the whole of Italy." 

These fears were not exaggerated, as the Gothic soldiery were 
liable to break out into savagery, as they did twenty-five years 
later in the sack of Rome. 

Ambrose's strength lay in the support of the people. He was 
accused of inciting them, but replied that "it was in my power 
not to excite them, but in God's hands to quiet them." None of 
the Arians, he says, dared to go forth, as there was not one Arian 
among the citizens. He was formally commanded to surrender the 
basilica, and the soldiers were ordered to use violence if necessary. 
But in the end they refused to use violence, and the Emperor was 
compelled to give way. A great battle had been won in the contest 
for ecclesiastical independence; Ambrose had demonstrated that 
there were matters in which the State must yield to the Church, 
and had thereby established a new principle which retains its 
importance to the present day. 

His next conflict was with the Emperor Theodosius. A syna- 
gogue had been burnt, and the Count of the East reported that 
this had been done at the instigation of die local bishop. The 
Emperor ordered that the actual incendiaries should be punished, 
and that the guilty bishop should rebuild the synagogue. St. 
Ambrose neither admits nor denies the bishop's complicity, but 
is indignant that the Emperor should seem to side with Jews 
against Christians. Suppose the bishop refuses to obey? He will 
then have to become a martyr if he persists, or an apostate if he 
gives way. Suppose the Count decides to rebuild the synagogue 
himself at the expense of the Christians? In that case the Emperor 
will have an apostate Count, and Christian money will be taken 
to support unbelief. "Shall, then, a place be made for the unbelief 
of the Jews out of the spoils of the Church, and shall the patrimony, 
which by the favour of Christ has been gained for Christians, be 
transferred to the treasuries of unbelievers?" He continues: "But 

358 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

perhaps the cause of discipline moves you, O Emperor. Which, 
then, is of greater importance, the show of discipline or the cause 
of religion ? It is needful that judgment should yield to religion. 
Have you not heard, O Emperor, how, when Julian commanded 
that the Temple of Jerusalem should be restored, those who were 
clearing the rubbish were consumed by fire?" 

It is clear that, in the Saint's opinion, the destruction of syna- 
gogues should not be punished in any way. This is an example of 
the manner in which, as soon as it acquired power, the Church 
began to stimulate anti-Semitism. 

The next conflict between Emperor and Saint was more honour- 
able to the latter. In A.D. 390, when Theodosius was in Milan, a 
mob in Thessalonica murdered the captain of the garrison. Theo- 
dosius, on receiving the news, was seized with ungovernable fury, 
and ordered an abominable revenge. When the people were 
assembled in the circus, the soldiers fell upon them, and massacred 
at least seven thousand of them in an indiscriminate slaughter. 
Hereupon Ambrose, who had endeavoured in advance to restrain 
the Emperor, but in vain, wrote him a letter full of splendid 
courage, on a purely moral issue, involving, for once, no question 
of theology or the power of the Church: 

"There was that done in the city of the Thessalonians of which 
no similar record exists, which I was not able to prevent happening; 
which, indeed, I had before said would be most atrocious when 
I so often petitioned against it." 

David repeatedly sinned, and confessed his sin with penitence. 1 
Will Theodosius do likewise? Ambrose decides that "I dare not 
offer the sacrifice if you intend to be present. Is that which is not 
allowed after shedding the blood of one innocent person, allowed 
after shedding the blood of many? I do not think so." 

The Emperor repented, and, divested of the purple, did public 
penance in the cathedral of Milan. From that time until his death 
in 395, he had no friction with Ambrose. 

Ambrose, while he was eminent as a statesman, was, in other 
respects, merely typical of his age. He wrote, like other ecclesi- 
astical authors, a treatise in praise of virginity, and another 

* This allusion to the Books of Samuel begins a line of biblical argu- 
ment against kings which persisted throughout the Middle Ages, and 
even in the conflict of the Puritans with the Stuarts. It appears for instance 
in Milton. - 

359 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

deprecating the remarriage of widows. When he had decided on 
the site for his new cathedral, two skeletons (revealed in a vision, 
it was said) were conveniently discovered on the spot, were found 
to work miracles, and were declared by him to be those of two 
martyrs. Other miracles are related in his letters, with all the 
credulity characteristic of his times. He was inferior to Jerome 
as a scholar, and to Augustine as a philosopher. But as a statesman, 
who skilfully and courageously consolidated the power of the 
Church, he stands out as a man of the first rank. 

Jerome is chiefly notable as the translator who produced the 
Vulgate, which remains to this day the official Catholic version of 
the Bible. Until his day the Western Church relied, as regards 
the Old Testament, chiefly on translations from the Septuagint, 
which, in important ways, differed from the Hebrew original. 
Christians, as we have seen, were given to maintaining that the 
Jews, since the rise of Christianity, had falsified the Hebrew text 
where it seemed to predict the Messiah. This was a view which 
sound scholarship showed to be untenable, and which Jerome 
firmly rejected. He accepted the help of rabbis, given secretly for 
fear of the Jews. In defending himself against Christian criticism 
he said: "Let him who would challenge aught in this translation 
ask the Jews." Because of his acceptance of the Hebrew text in 
the form which the Jews regarded as correct, his version had, at 
first, a largely hostile reception; but it won its way, partly because 
St. Augustine on the whole supported it. It was a great achieve- 
ment, involving considerable textual criticism. 

Jerome was born in 345 five years after Ambrose not far from 
Aquileia, at a town called Stridon, which was destroyed by the 
Goths in 377. His family were well-to-do, but not rich. In 363 he 
went to Rome, where he studied rhetoric and sinned. After travel- 
ling in Gaul, he settled in Aquileia, and become an ascetic. The 
next five years he spent as a hermit in the Syrian wilderness. "His 
life while in the desert was one of rigorous penance, of tears and 
groans alternating with spiritual ecstasy, and of temptations from 
haunting memories of Roman life ; he lived in a cell or cavern ; he 
earned his daily bread, and was clad in sackcloth." 1 After this 
period, he travelled to Constantinople, and lived in Rome for three 
years, where he became the friend and adviser of Pope Damasus, 
with whose encouragement he undertook his translation of the Bible. 
1 Selict Library of Nutmt and Post-Nicent Father* t Vol. VI, p. 17. 

360 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

St. Jerome was a man of many quarrels. He quarrelled with St. 
Augustine about the somewhat questionable behaviour of St. Peter 
as related by St. Paul in Galatians ii ; he broke with his friend Ru- 
finus over Origen ; and he was so vehement against Pelagius that 
his monastery was attacked by a Pelagian mob. After the death of 
Damasus, he seems to have quarrelled with the new Pope; he had, 
while in Rome, become acquainted with various ladies who were 
both aristocratic and pious, some of whom he persuaded to adopt 
the ascetic life. The new Pope, in common with many other people 
in Rome, disliked this. For this reason among others, Jerome left 
Rome for Bethlehem, where he remained from 386 till his death 
in 420. 

Among his distinguished female converts, two were especially 
notable: the widow Paula and her daughter Eustochium. Both these 
ladies accompanied him on his circuitous journey to Bethlehem. 
They were of the highest nobility, and one cannot but feel a flavour 
of snobbery in the Saint's attitude to them. When Paula died and 
was buried at Bethlehem, Jerome composed an epitaph for her 
tomb : 

Within this tomb a child of Scipio lies, 

A daughter of the far-famed Pauline house, 

A scion of the Gracchi, of the stock 

Of Agamemnon's self, illustrious: 

Here rests the lady Paula, well-beloved 

Of both her parents, with Eustochium 

For daughter ; she the first of Roman dames 

Who hardship chose and Bethlehem for Christ. 1 

Some of Jerome's letters to Eustochium are curious. He gives 
her advice on the preservation of virginity, very detailed and frank; 
he explains the exact anatomical meaning of certain euphemisms 
in the Old Testament ; and he employs a kind of erode mysticism 
in praising the joys of conventual life. A nun is the Bride of 
Christ ; this marriage is celebrated in the Song of Solomon. In a 
long letter written at the time when she took the vows, he gives 
a remarkable message to her mother: "Are you angry with her 
because she chooses to be a king's [Christ's] wife and not a sol- 
dier's? She has conferred on you a high privilege; you are now 
the mother-in-law of God." 8 

1 Select Library of A'*ffr und Fo$t-Ktcene Fathers, Vol. VI, p, 212. 
ibid., p. 30. 

361 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

To Eustochium herself, in the same letter (xxii), he says: 

"Ever let the privacy of your chamber guard you ; ever let the 
Bridegroom sport with you within. Do you pray ? You speak to the 
Bridegroom. Do you read ? He speaks to you. When sleep over- 
takes you He will come behind and put His hand through the hole 
of the door, and your heart shall be moved for Him; and you will 
awake and rise up and say: "I am sick of love.' Then He will reply: 
'A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a 
fountain sealed/ " 

In the same letter he relates how, after cutting himself off from 
relations and friends, u and harder still from the dainty food 
to which I had been accustomed," he still could not bear to be 
parted from his library, and took it with him to the desert. "And 
so, miserable man that I was, I would fast only that I might after- 
wards read Cicero." After days and nights of remorse, he would 
fall again, and read Plautus. After such indulgence, the style of 
the prophets seemed "rude and repellent." At last, during a fever, 
he dreamed that, at the Last Judgment, Christ asked him who 
he was, and he replied that he was a Christian. The answer came: 
"Thou liest, thou art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ." 
Thereupon he was ordered to be scourged. At length Jerome, in 
his dream, cried out: "Lord, if ever again I possess worldly books, 
or if ever again I read such, I have denied Thee." This, he adds, 
"was no sleep or idle dream." 1 

After this, for some years, his letters contain few classical quota- 
tions. But after a certain time he lapses again into verses from 
Virgil, Horace, and even Ovid. They seem, however, to be from 
memory, particularly as some of them are repeated over and over 
again. 

Jerome's letters express the feelings produced by the fall of the 
Roman Empire more vividly than any others known to me. In 
396 he writes: 2 

"I shudder when I think of the catastrophes of our time. For 
twenty years and more the blood of Romans has been shed daily 
between Constantinople and the Julian Alps. Scythia, Thrace, 
Macedonia, Dacia, Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Dalmatia, the 

* This hostility to pagan literature persisted in the Church until the 
eleventh century, except in Ireland, where the Olympian gods had never 
been worshipped, and were therefore not feared by the Church. 

1 Utter be. 

, ' 362 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

Pannonias each and all of these have been sacked and pillaged 
and plundered by Goths and Sarmatians, Quad! and Alans, Huns 
and Vandals and Marchmen. . . . The Roman world is falling: yet 
we hold up our heads instead of bowing them. What courage, 
think you, have the Corinthians now, or the Athenians or the 
Lacedaemonians or the Arcadians, or any of the Greeks over whom 
the barbarians bear sway ? I have mentioned only a few cities, but 
these once the capitals of no mean States " 

He goes on to relate the ravages of the Huns in the East, and 
ends with the reflection : "To treat such themes as they deserve, 
Thucydides and Sallust would be as good as dumb." 

Seventeen years* later, three years after the sack of Rome, he 
writes: 1 

"The world sinks into ruin: yes! but shameful to say our sins 
still live and flourish. The renowned city, the capital of the Roman 
Kmpire, is swallowed up in one tremendous fire ; and there is no 
part of the earth where Romans are not in exile. Churches once 
held sacred are now but heaps of dust and ashes ; and yet we have 
our minds set on the desire of gain. We live as though we were 
going to die to-morrow; yet we build as though we were going 
to live always in this world. Our walls shine with gold, our ceilings 
also and the capitals of our pillars ; yet Christ dies before our doors 
naked and hungry in the person of His poor." 

This passage occurs incidentally in a letter to a friend who has 
decided to devote his daughter to perpetual virginity, and most 
of it is concerned \\ith the rules to be observed in the education 
of girls so dedicated. It is strange that, with all Jerome's deep 
feeling about the fall of the ancient world, he thinks the preser- 
vation of virginity more important than victory over the Huns and 
Vandals and Goths. Never once do his thoughts turn to any 
possible measure of practical statesmanship; never once does he 
point out the evils of the fiscal system, or of reliance on an army 
composed of barbarians. The same is true of Ambrose and of 
Augustine ; Ambrose, it is true, was a statesman, but only on behalf 
of the Church. It is no wonder that the Empire fell into ruin when 
all the best and most vigorous minds of the age were so compl 
remote from secular concerns. On the other hand, if 
inevitable, the Christian outlook was admirably fitted^ 
fortitude, and to enable them to preserve their 

1 Letter cxxviii. 

363 




WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

when earthly hopes seemed vain. The expression of this point of 
view, in The City of God, was the supreme merit of St. Augustine. 

Of St. Augustine I shall speak, in this chapter, only as a man ; 
as a theologian and philosopher, I shall consider him in the next 
chapter. 

He was born in 354, nine years after Jerome, and fourteen years 
after Ambrose; he was a native of Africa, where he passed much 
the greater part of his life. His mother was a Christian, but his 
father was not. After a period as a Manicluean, he became a 
Catholic, and was baptized by Ambrose in Milan. He became 
bishop of Hippo, not far from Carthage, about the year 396. There 
he remained until his death in 430. 

Of his early life we know much more than in the case of most 
ecclesiastics, because he has told of it in his Confessions. This book 
has had famous imitators, particularly Rousseau and Tolstoy, but 
I do not think it had any comparable predecessors. St. Augustine 
is in some ways similar to Tolstoy, to whom, however, he is 
superior in intellect. He was a passionate man, in youth very far 
from a pattern of virtue, but driven by an inner impulse to search 
for truth and righteousness. Like Tolstoy, he was obsessed, in his 
later years, by a sense of sin, which made his life stern and his 
philosophy inhuman. He combated heresies vigorously, but some 
of his views, when repeated by Jansenius in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, were pronounced heretical. Until the Protestants took up 
his opinions, however, the Catholic Church had never impugned 
their orthodox)*. 

One of the first incidents of his life related in the Confessions 
occurred in his boyhood, and did not, in itself, greatly distinguish 
him from other boys. It appears that, with some companions of 
his own age, he despoiled a neighbour's pear tree, although he was 
not hungry, and his parents had better pears at home. He con- 
tinued throughout his life to consider this an act of almost in- 
credible wickedness. It would not have been so bad if he had been 
hungry, or had had no other means of getting pears; but, as it was, 
the act was one of pure mischief, inspired by the love of wicked- 
ness for its own sake. It is this that makes it so unspeakably 
black. He beseeches God to forgive him: 

"Behold my heart, O God, behold my heart, which Thou hadst 
pity upon in the bottom of the abyss. Now, behold, let my heart 
tell Thee, what it sought there, that I should be gratuitously 

364 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

wicked, having no temptation to that evil deed, but the evil deed 
itself. It was foul, and I loved it; I loved to perish, I loved mine 
own fault, not that for the sake of which I committed the fault, 
but my fault itself I loved. Foul soul, falling from the firmament 
to expulsion from Thy presence; not seeking aught through the 
shame, but the shame itself I" 1 

Me goes on like this for seven chapters, and all about some pears 
plucked from a tree in a boyish prank. To a modern mind, this 
seems morbid; 2 but in his own age it seemed right and a mark 
of holiness. The sense of sin, which was very strong in his day, 
came to the Jews as a way of reconciling self-importance with 
outward defeat. Yahweh was omnipotent, and Yahweh was specially 
interested in the Jews; why, then, did they not prosper? Because 
they were wicked : they were idolaters, they married gentiles, they 
failed to observe the Law. God's purposes were centred on the 
Jews, but, since righteousness is the greatest of goods, and is 
achieved through tribulation, they must first be chastised, and 
must recognize their chastisement as a mark of God's paternal love. 

Christians put the Church in place of the Chosen People, but 
except in one respect this made little difference to the psychology 
of sin. The Church, like the Jews, suffered tribulation; the Church 
was troubled by heresies; individual Christians fell into apostasy 
under the stress of persecution. There was, however, one impor- 
tant development, already made, to a great extent, by the Jews, 
and that was the substitution of individual for communal sin. 
Originally, it was the Jewish nation that sinned, and that was 
collectively punished; but later sin became more personal, thus 
losing its political character. When the Church was substituted 
for the Jewish nation, this change became essential, since the 
Church, as a spiritual entity, could not sin, but the individual 
sinner could cease to be in communion with the Church. Sin, as 
we said just now, is connected with self-importance. Originally 
the importance was that of the Jewish nation, but subsequently 
it was that of the individual not of the Church, because the 
Church never sinned. It thus came about that Christian theology 
had two parts, one concerned with the Church, and one with the 
individual soul. In later times, the first of these was most em- 



s, Book II, chap. iv. 

1 I must except Mahatma Gnndhi, whoso autobiography contains 
passages closely similar to the above. 

365 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

phasized by Catholics, and the second by Protestants, but in St. 
Augustine both exist equally, without his having any sense of 
disharmony. Those who are saved are those whom God has pre- 
destined to salvation ; this is a direct relation of the soul to God. 
But no one will be saved unless he has been baptized, and thereby 
become a member of the Church; this makes the Church an 
intermediary between the soul and God. 

Sin is what is essential to the direct relation, since it explains 
how a beneficent Deity can cause men to suffer, and how, in spite 
of this, individual souls can be what is of most importance in the 
created world. It is therefore not surprising that the theology 
upon which the Reformation relied should be due to a man whose 
sense of sin was abnormal. 

So much for the pears. Let us now see what the Confessions have 
to say on some other subjects. 

Augustine relates how he learnt Latin, painlessly, at his mother's 
knee, but hated Greek, which they tried to teach him at school, 
because he was "urged vehemently with cruel threats and punish- 
ments." To the end of his life, his knowledge of Greek remained 
slight. One might have supposed that he would go on, from this 
contrast, to draw a moral in favour of gentle methods in education. 
What he says, however, is: 

"It is quite clear, then, that a free curiosity has more power to 
make us learn these things than a terrifying obligation. Only this 
obligation restrains the waverings of that freedom by Thy laws, 
O my God, Thy laws, from the master's rod to the martyr's trials, 
for Thy laws have the effect of mingling for us certain wholesome 
bitters, which recall us to Thee away from that pernicious blithe- 
someness, by means of which we depart from Thee." 

The schoolmaster's blows, though they failed to make him know 
Greek, cured him of being perniciously blithesome, and were, on 
this ground, a desirable part of education. For those who make sin 
the most important of all human concerns, this view is logical. He 
goes on to point out that he sinned, not only as a school-boy, when 
he told lies and stole food, but even earlier; indeed he devotes a 
whole chapter (Book I, chap, vii) to proving that even infants at the 
breast are full of sin gluttony, jealousy, and other horrible vices. 

When he reached adolescence, the lusts of the flesh overcame 
him. "Where was I, and how far was I exiled from the delights of 
Thy house, in that sixteenth year of the age of my flesh, when the 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

madness of lust which hath licence through man's viciousness, 
though forbidden by Thy laws, took the rule over me, and I 
resigned myself wholly to it?" 1 

His father took no pains to prevent this evil, but confined him- 
self to giving help in Augustine's studies. His mother, St. Monica, 
on the contrary, exhorted him to chastity, but in vain. And even 
she did not, at that time, suggest marriage, "lest my prospects 
might be embarrassed by the clog of a wife." 

At the age of sixteen he went to Carthage, "where there seethed 
all around me a cauldron of lawless loves. I loved not yet, yet I 
loved to love, and out of a deep-seated want, I hated myself for 
wanting not. I sought what I might love, in love with loving, and 
I hated safety. ... To love then, and to be beloved, was sweet to 
me; but more, when I obtained to* enjoy the person I loved. I 
defiled, therefore, the spring of friendship with the filth of con- 
cupiscence, and I beclouded its brightness with the hell of lust- 
fulness." 2 These words describe his relation to a mistress whom 
he loved faithfully for many years, 3 and by whom he had a son, 
whom he also loved, and to whom, after his conversion, he gave 
much care in religious education. 

The time came when he and his mother thought he ought to 
begin to think of marrying. He became engaged to a girl of whom 
she approved, and it was held necessary that he should break with 
his mistress. "My mistress," he says, "being torn from my side 
as a hindrance to my marriage, my heart which clave unto her was 
torn and wounded and bleeding. And she returned to Africa 
[Augustine was at this time in Milan], vowing unto Thee never 
to know any other man, leaving with me my son by her." 4 As, 
however, the marriage could not take place for two years, owing 
to the girl's youth, he took meanwhile another mistress, less official 
and less acknowledged. His conscience increasingly troubled him, 
and he used to pray: "Give me chastity and continence, only not 
yet." 6 At last, before the time had come for his marriage, religion 
won a complete victory, and he dedicated the rest of his life to 
celibacy. 

To return to an earlier time: in his nineteenth year, having 
achieved proficiency in rhetoric, he was recalled to philosophy by 

1 Confusions, Book II, chap. ii. * Ibid,, Book III, chap. i. 

8 Ibid., Book IV, chap. ii. ' Ibid., Book VI, chap. xv. 

' Ibid., Book VIII, chap. vii. 

367 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Cicero, He tried reading the Bible, but found it lacking in 
Ciceronian dignity. It was at this time that he became a Mwiichaean, 
which grieved his mother. By profession he was a teacher of 
rhetoric. He was addicted to astrology, to which, in later life, he 
was averse, because it teaches that "the inevitable cause of thy 
sin is in the sky." 1 He read philosophy, so far as it could be read 
in Latin; he mentions particularly Aristotle's Ten Categories > 
which, he says, he understood without the help of a teacher. "And 
what did it profit me, that I, the vilest slave of evil passions, read 
by myself all the books of so-called 'liberal' arts, and understood 
whatever I could read? . . . For I had my back to the light, and 
my face to the things enlightened ; whence my face . . . itself was 
not enlightened." 8 At this time he believed that God was a vast 
and bright body, and he himself a part of that body. One could 
wish that he had told in detail the tenets of the Manichaeans, 
instead of merely saying they were erroneous. 

It is interesting that St. Augustine's first reasons for rejecting 
the doctrines of Manichanis were scientific. He remembered so 
he tells us 8 what he had learned of astronomy from the writings 
of the best astronomers, "and I compared them with the sayings 
of Manichaeus, who in his crazy folly has written much and 
copiously upon these subjects; but none of his reasoning of the 
solstices, nor equinoxes, nor eclipses, nor whatever of this kind 
I had learned in books of secular philosophy, was satisfactory to 
me. But I was commanded to believe; and yet it corresponded 
not with the reasonings obtained by calculations, and by my own 
observations, but was quite contrary." He is careful to point out 
that scientific mistakes are not in themselves a sign of errors as 
to the faith, but only become so when delivered with an air of 
authority as known through divine inspiration. One wonders what 
he would have thought if he had lived in the time of Galileo. 

In the hope of resolving his doubts, a Manich&an bishop named 
Faustus, reputed the most learned member of the sect, met him 
and reasoned with him. But "I found him first utterly ignorant 
of liberal sciences, save grammar, and that but in an ordinary 
way. But because he had read some of Tully's Orations, a very 
few books of Seneca, some things of the poets, and such few 
volumes of his own sect, as were written in I<atin and in logical 

1 Cottfesricns, Book IV, chap. iii. 

1 IMd. t Book IV, chap. xvi. * /*, Book V, chap, iii 

368 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

order, and was daily practised in speaking, he acquired a certain 
eloquence, which proved the more pleasing and seductive, because 
under the control of his good sense, and with a certain natural 
grace." 1 

He found Faustus quite unable to solve his astronomical diffi- 
culties. The books of the Manichecans, he tells us, "are full of 
lengthy fables, of the heaven, and stars, sun, and moon," which 
do not agree with what has been discovered by astronomers; but 
when he questioned Faustus on these matters, Faustus frankly 
confessed his ignorance. "Even for this I liked him the better. 
For the modesty of a candid mind is even more attractive than 
the knowledge of those things which I desired ; and such I found 
him, in all the more difficult and subtle questions." 2 

This sentiment is surprisingly liberal; one would not have ex- 
pected it in that age. Nor is it quite in harmony with St. Augus- 
tine's later attitude towards heretics. 

At this time he decided to go to Rome, not, he says, because 
there the income of a teacher was higher than at Carthage, but 
because he had heard that classes were more orderly. At Carthage, 
the disorders perpetrated by students were such that teaching was 
almost impossible; but at Rome, while there was less disorder, 
students fraudulently evaded payment. 

In Rome, he still associated with the Manichaeans, but with less 
conviction of their tightness. He began to think that the Academics 
were right in holding that men ought to doubt everything. 3 He 
still, however, agreed with the Manichseans in thinking "that it 
is not we ourselves that sin, but that some other nature (what, I 
know not) sins in us," and he believed Evil to be some kind of 
substance. This makes it clear that, before as after his conversion, 
the question of sin pre-occupied him. 

After about a year in Rome, he was sent to Milan by the Prefect 
Symmachus, in response to a request from that city for a teacher 
of rhetoric. At Milan he became acquainted with Ambrose, "known 
to the whole world as among the best of men." He came to love 
Ambrose for his kindness, and to prefer the Catholic doctrine to 
that of the Manichseans; hut for a while he was held back by the 
scepticism he had learnt from the Academics, "to which philoso- 
phers notwithstanding, because they were without the saving name 

1 Confessions, Bcx>k V, chap. vi. 

d., Book II, chap. vii. 8 /</., Book V, chap. x. 

369 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of Christ, I utterly refused to commit the care of my sick 
soul." 1 

In Milan he was joined by his mother, who had a powerful 
influence in hastening the last steps to his conversion. She was a 
very earnest Catholic, and he writes of her always in a tone of 
reverence. She was the more important to him at this time, because 
Ambrose was too busy to converse with him privately. 

There is a very interesting chapter 9 in which he compares the 
Platonic philosophy with Christian doctrine. The Lord, he says, 
at this time provided him with "certain books of the Platonists, 
translated from Greek into Latin. And therein I read, not indeed 
in these words, but to the same purpose, enforced by many and 
diverse reasons, that 'In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God: the same was in 
the beginning with God ; all things were made by Him, and without 
Him was nothing made: that which was made by Him is life, and 
the life was the light of men, and the light shineth in the darkness, 
and the darkness comprehended it not. And that the soul of man, 
though it 'bears witness to the light,' yet itself 'is not that light,' 
but God, the Word of God, 'is that true light that lighteth every 
man that cometh into the world. 1 And that 'He was in the world, 
and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not. 9 
But that 'He came unto His own, and His own received Him not; 
but as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become 
the sons of God, even to them that believe on His Name': this I 
read not there." He also did not read there that "the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us" ; nor that "He humbled Himself, 
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross"; 
nor that "at the name of Jesus every knee should bow." 

Broadly speaking, he found in the Platonists the metaphysical 
doctrine of the Logos, but not the doctrine of the Incarnation and 
the consequent doctrine of human salvation. Something not 
unlike these doctrines existed in Orphism and the other mystery 
religions; but of this St. Augustine appears to have been ignorant. 
In any case, none of these were connected with a comparatively 
recent historical event, as Christianity was. 

As against the Manichaeans, who were dualists, Augustine came 
to believe that evil originates not from some substance, but from 
pcrvcrseness of will. 

1 Confetti. Book V. chap. tiv. Ibid.. Book VII, chap. is. 

370 



THREE DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH 

He found especial comfort in the writings of St. Paul. 1 
At length, after passionate inward struggles, he was converted 
(386) ; he gave up his professorship, his mistress, and his bride, and, 
after a brief period of meditation in retirement, was baptized by 
St. Ambrose. His mother rejoiced, but died not long afterwards. 
In 388 he returned to Africa, where he remained for the rest of his 
life, fully occupied with his episcopal duties and with controversial 
writings against various heresies, Donatist, Manichaean, and 
Pelagian. 

1 Confessions, Book VII, chap. xxi. 



37* 



Chapter IV 

ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND 
THEOLOGY 

ST. AUGUSTINE was a very voluminous writer, mainly on 
theological subjects. Some of his controversial writing was 
topical, and lost interest through its very success ; but some 
of it, especially what is concerned with the Pelagians, remained 
practically influential down to modern times. I do not propose to 
treat his works exhaustively, but only to discuss what seems to me 
important, either intrinsically or historically. I shall consider: 

First: his pure philosophy, particularly his theory of time; 
Second: his philosophy of history, as developed in The City 

ofGod\ 
Third: his theory of salvation, as propounded ajrainst the 

Pelagians. 

1. PURE PHILOSOPHY 

St. Augustine, at most times, docs not occupy himself with pure 
philosophy, but when he does he shows very great ability'. He is 
the first of a long line whose purely speculative views are influenced 
by the necessity of agreeing with Scripture. This cannot be said of 
earlier Christian philosophers, e.g., Origen ; in Origen, Christianity 
and Platonism lie side by side, and do not interpenetrate. In St. 
Augustine, on the other hand, original thinking in pure philosophy 
is stimulated by the fact that Platonism, in certain respects, is not 
in harmony with Genesis. 

The best purely philosophical work in St. Augustine's writings 
is the eleventh book of the Confessions. Popular editions of the 
Confessions end with Book X, on the ground that what follows is 
uninteresting; it is uninteresting because it is good philosophy, 
not biography. Book XI is concerned with the problem: Creation 
having occurred as the first chapter of Genesis asserts, and as 
Augustine maintains against the Manicha-ans, it should have 
occurred as soon as possible. So he imagines an objector arguing. 

The first point to realize, if his answer is to be understood, is that 

37* 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

creation out of nothing, which was taught in the Old Testament, 
was an idea wholly foreign to Greek philosophy. When Plato speaks 
of creation, he imagines a primitive matter to which God gives 
form ; and the same is true of Aristotle. Their God is an artificer or 
architect, rather than a Creator. Substance is thought of as eternal 
and uncreated ; only form is due to the will of God. As against 
this view, St. Augustine maintains, as every orthodox Christian 
must, that the world was created not from any certain matter, 
but from nothing. God created substance, not only order and 
arrangement. 

The Greek view, that creation out of nothing is impossible, has 
recurred at intervals in Christian times, and has led to pantheism. 
Pantheism holds that God and the world are not distinct, and that 
everything in the world is part of God. This view is developed most 
fully in Spinoza, but is one to which almost all mystics arc attracted. 
It has thus happened, throughout the Christian centuries, that 
mystics have had difficulty in remaining orthodox, since they find 
it hard to believe that the world is outside God. Augustine, how- 
ever, feels no difficulty on this point; Genesis is explicit, and that 
is enough for him. His view on this matter is essential to his theory 
of time. 

Why was the world not created sooner? Because there was no 
"sooner." Time was created when the world was created. God is 
eternal, in the sense of being timeless; in God there is no before 
and after, but only an eternal present. God's eternity is exempt from 
the relation of time; all time is present to Him at once. He did not 
precede His own creation of time, for that would imply that He was 
in time, whereas He stands eternally outside the stream of time. 
This leads St. Augustine to a very admirable relativistic theory 
of time. 

"What, then, is time ?" lie asks. "If no one asks of me, I know; if 
I wish to explain to him who asks, I know not." Various difficulties 
perplex him. Neither past nor future, he says, but only the present, 
really li; the present is only a moment, and time can only be 
measured while it is passing. Nevertheless, there really is time past 
and future. We seem here to be led into contradictions. The only 
way Augustine can find to avoid these contradictions is to say that 
past and future can only be thought of as present: "past" must 
be identified with memory, and "future" with expectation, 
memory and expectation being both present facts. There are, he 

373 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

says, three times: "a present of things past, a present of things 
present, and a present of things future." "The present of things 
past is memory; the present of things present is sight; and the 
present of things future is expectation." 1 To say that there are 
three times, past, present, and future, is a loose way of speaking. 

He realizes that he has not really solved all difficulties by this 
theory. "My soul yearns to know this most entangled enigma," he 
says, and he prays to God to enlighten him, assuring Him that 
his interest in the problem does not arise from vain curiosity. "I 
confess to Thee, O Lord, that I am as yet ignorant what time is." 
But the gist of the solution he suggests is that time is subjective: 
time is in the human mind, which expects, considers, and remem- 
bers. 2 It follows that there can be no time without a created being, 9 
and that to speak of time before the Creation is meaningless. 

I do not myself agree with this theory, in so far as it makes time 
something mental. But it is clearly a very able theory, deserving 
to be seriously considered. I should go further, and say that it is 
a great advance on anything to be found on the subject in Greek 
philosophy. It contains a better and clearer statement than Kant's 
of the subjective theory of time a theory which, since Kant, has 
been widely accepted among philosophers. 

The theory that time is only an aspect of our thoughts is one of 
the most extreme forms of that subjectivism which, as we have 
seen, gradually increased in antiquity from the time of Protagoras 
and Socrates onwards. Its emotional aspect is obsession with sin, 
which came later than its intellectual aspects. St. Augustine 
exhibits both kinds of subjectivism. Subjectivism led him to 
anticipate not only Kant's theory of time, but Descartes' cogito. 
In his Soliloquia he says: "You, who wish to know, do you know 
you are? I know it. Whence are you? I know not. Do you feel 
yourself single or multiple? I know not. Do you feel yourself 
moved? I know not. Do you know that you think? I do." This 
contains not only Descartes' cogito, but his reply to Ga&sendi's 
ambulo ergo sum. As a philosopher, therefore, Augustine deserves 
a high placl. 

II. THE CITY OF GOD 

When, tn 410, Rome was sacked by the Goths, the pagans, not 
unnaturally, attributed the disaster to the abandonment of the 

1 Confessions, Book XI, chap. xx. 

1 Ibid., chap, xxvtit. * ibid., chap. xxx. 

374 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

ancient gods. So long as Jupiter was worshipped, they said, Rome 
remained powerful; now that the Emperors have turned away 
from him, he no longer protects his Romans. This pagan argument 
called for an answer. The City of God, written gradually between 
412 and 427, was St. Augustine's answer; but it took, as it pro- 
ceeded, a far wider flight, and developed a complete Christian 
scheme of history, past, present, and future. It was an immensely 
influential book throughout the Middle Ages, especially in the 
struggles of the Church with secular princes. 

Like some other very great books, it composes itself, in the 
memory of those who have read it, into something better than at 
first appears on re-reading. It contains a great deal that hardly 
anyone at the present day can accept, and its central thesis is some- 
what obscured by excrescences belonging to his age. But the broad 
conception of a contrast between the City of this world and the 
City of God has remained an inspiration to many, and even now 
can be restated in non-theological terms. 

To omit detail in an account of the book, and concentrate on the 
central idea, would give an unduly favourable view; on the other 
hand, to concentrate on the detail would be to omit what is best 
and most important. I shall endeavour to avoid both errors by first 
giving some account of the detail and then passing on to the 
general idea as it appeared in historical development. 

The book begins with considerations arising out of the sack of 
Rome, and designed to show that even worse things happened in 
pre-Christian times. Among the pagans who attribute the disaster 
to Christianity, there are many, the Saint says, who, during the 
sack, sought sanctuary in the churches, which the Goths, because 
they were Christians, respected. In the sack of Troy, on the 
contrary, Juno's temple afforded no protection, nor did the gods 
preserve the city from destruction. The Romans never spared 
temples in conquered cities; in this respect, the sack of Rome 
was milder than most, and the mitigation was a result of 
Christianity. 

Christians who suffered the sack have no right to complain, for 
several reasons. Some wicked Goths may have prospered at their 
expense, but they will suffer hereafter: if all sin were punished on 
earth, there would be no need of the Last Judgment. What Chris- 
tians endured would, if they were virtuous, turn to their edification, 
for saints, in the loss of things temporal, lose nothing of any value, 

375 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

It does not matter if their bodies lie unburied, because ravenous 
beasts cannot interfere with the resurrection of the body. 

Next comes the question of pious virgins who were raped during 
the sack. There were apparently some who held that these ladies, 
by no fault of their own, had lost the crown of virginity. This view 
the Saint very sensibly opposes. "Tush, another's lust cannot 
pollute thee." Chastity is a virtue of the mind, and is not lost by 
rape, but is lost by the intention of sin, even if unperformed. It 
is suggested that God permitted rapes because the victims had 
been too proud of their continence. It is wicked to commit suicide 
in order to avoid being raped ; this leads to a long discussion of 
Lucretia, who ought not to have killed herself, because suicide is 
always a sin. 

There is one proviso to the exculpation of virtuous women who 
are raped: they must not enjoy it. If they do, they are sinful. 

He comes next to the wickedness of the heathen gods. For 
example: "Your stage-plays, those spectacles of uncleanness, 
those licentious vanities, were not first brought up at Rome by 
the corruptions of men, but by the direct command of your 
gods/' 1 It would be better to worship a virtuous man, such as 
Scipio, than these immoral gods. But as for the sack of Rome, it 
need not trouble Christians, who have a sanctuary in the "pilgrim 
city of God." 

In this world, the two cities the earthly and the heavenly are 
commingled ; but hereafter the predestinate and the reprobate will 
be separated. In this life, we cannot know who, even among our 
seeming enemies, are to be found ultimately among the elect. 

The most difficult part of the work, we are told, will consist in 
the refutation of the philosophers, with the best of whom Chris- 
tians are to a large extent in agreement for instance as to immor- 
tality and the creation of the world by God. 2 

The philosophers did not throw over the worship of the heathen 
gods, and their moral instructions were weak because the gods 
were wicked. It is not suggested that the gods are mere fables; 
they are held by St. Augustine to exist, but to be devils. They 
liked to have filthy stories told of them, because they wanted to 
injure men. Jupiter's deeds count more, with most pagans, than 
Plato's doctrines or Cato's opinions. "Plato, who would not allow 
poets to dwell in a well-governed city, showed that his sole worth 

1 The City of God, I, 31. lbid. t I, 35- 

376 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

was better than those gods, that desire to be honoured with stage- 
plays." 1 

Rome was always wicked, from the rape of the Sabine women 
onwards. Many chapters are devoted to the sinfulness of Roman 
imperialism. Nor is it true that Rome did not suffer before the 
State became Christian; from the Gauls and the civil wars it 
suffered as much as from the Goths, and more. 

Astrology is not only wicked, but false ; this may be proved from 
the different fortunes of twins, who have the same horoscope. 9 
The Stoic conception of Fate (which was connected with astrology) 
is mistaken, since angels and men have free will. It is true that 
God has foreknowledge of our sins, but we do not sin because of 
His foreknowledge. It is a mistake to suppose that virtue brings 
unhappiness, even in this world: Christian emperors, if virtuous, 
have been happy even if not fortunate, and Constantine and 
Theodosius were fortunate as well; again, the Jewish kingdom 
lasted as long as the Jews adhered to the truth of religion. 

There is a very sympathetic account of Plato, whom he places 
above all other philosophers. All others are to give place to him: 
"Let Thales depart with his water, Anaximenes with the air, the 
Stoics with their fire, Epicurus with his atoms." 8 All these were 
materialists ; Plato was not. Plato saw that God is not any bodily 
thing, but that all things have their being from God, and from 
something immutable. He was right, also, in saying that perception 
is not the source of truth. Platonists are the best in logic and 
ethics, and nearest to Christianity. "It is said that Plotinus, that 
lived but lately, understood Plato the best of any. 1 ' As for Aristotle, 
he was Plato's inferior, but far above the rest. Both, however, said 
that all gods are good, and to be worshipped. 

As against the Stoics, who condemned all passion, St. Augustine 
holds that the passions of Christians may be causes of virtue; 
anger, or pity, is not to be condemned per s* , but we must inquire 
into its cause. 

Platonists are right about God, wrong about gods. They are also 
wrong in not acknowledging the Incarnation. 

There is a long discussion of angels and demons, which is con- 

1 Tfie City of God, II, 14. 

1 This argument is not original : it is derived from the academic sceptic 
Carncades. Cf. Curnont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, p. 166. 
* The City of God, VIII, 5. 

377 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

nected with the Neoplatonists. Angels may be good or bad, but 
demons are always bad. To angels, knowledge of temporal things 
(though they have it) is vile. St. Augustine holds with Plato that 
the sensible world is inferior to the eternal. 

Book XI begins the account of the nature of the City of God. 
The City of God is the society of the elect. Knowledge of God is 
obtained only through Christ. There are things that can be dis- 
covered by reason (as in the philosophers), but for all further 
religious knowledge we must rely on the Scriptures. We ought 
not to seek to understand time and space before the world was 
made: there was no time before the Creation, and there is no 
place where the world is not. 

Everything blessed is eternal, but not everything eternal is 
blessed e.g. hell and Satan. God foreknew the sins of devils, but 
also their use in improving the universe as a whole, which is 
analogous to antithesis in rhetoric. 

Origen errs in thinking that souls were given bodies as a punish- 
ment. If this were so, bad souls would have bad bodies; but devils, 
even the worst of them, have airy bodies, which are better 
than ours. 

The reason the world was created in six days is that six is a 
perfect number (i.e. equal to the sum of its factors). 

There are good and bad angels, but even the bad angels do not 
have an essence which is contrary to God. God's enemies are not 
so by nature, but by mil. The vicious will has no efficient cause, 
but only a deficient one ; it is not an effect, but a defect. 

The world is less than six thousand years old. History is not 
cyclic, as some philosophers suppose: "Christ died once for our 
sins." 1 

If our first parents had not sinned, they would not have died, 
but, because they sinned, all their posterity die. Eating the apple 
brought not only natural death, but eternal death, i.e. damnation. 

Porphyry is wrong in refusing bodies to saints in heaven. They 
will have better bodies than Adam's before the fall; their bodies 
will be spiritual, but not spirits, and will not have weight. Men 
will have male bodies, and women female bodies, and those who 
have died in infancy will rise again with adult bodies. 

Adam's sin would have brought all mankind to eternal death 
(i.e. damnation), but that God's grace has freed many from it. 

vi: I TheMtkmiant iv. 

378 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

Sin came from the soul, not from the flesh. Platonists and 
Manichseans both err in ascribing sin to the nature of the flesh, 
though Platonists are not so bad as Manichaeans. The punishment 
of all mankind for Adam's sin was just ; for, as a result of this 
sin, man, that might have been spiritual in body, became carnal 
in mind. 1 

This leads to a long and minute discussion of sexual lust, to 
which we are subject as part of our punishment for Adam's sin. 
This discussion is very important as revealing the psychology of 
asceticism; we must therefore go into it, although the Saint 
confesses that the theme is immodest. The theory advanced is as 
follows. 

It must be admitted that sexual intercourse in marriage is not 
sinful, provided the intention is to beget offspring. Yet even in 
marriage a virtuous man will wish that he could manage without 
lust. Even in marriage, as the desire for privacy shows, people are 
ashamed of sexual intercourse, because "this lawful act of nature 
is (from our first parents) accompanied with our penal shame." 
The cynics thought that one should be without shame, and 
Diogenes would have none of it, wishing to be in all things like 
a dog; yet even he, after one attempt, abandoned, in practice, 
this extreme of shamelessness. What is shameful about lust is its 
independence of the will. Adam and Eve, before the fall, could 
have had sexual intercourse without lust, though in fact they did 
not. Handicraftsmen, in the pursuit of their trade, move their 
hands without lust; similarly Adam, if only he had kept away 
from the apple-tree, could have performed the business of sex 
without the emotions that it now demands. The sexual members, 
like the rest of the body, would have obeyed the will. The need 
of lust in sexual intercourse is a punishment for Adam's sin, but 
for which sex might have been divorced from pleasure. Omitting 
some physiological details which the translator has very properly 
left in the decent obscurity of the original Latin, the above is 
St. Augustine's theory as regards sex. 

It is evident from the above that what makes the ascetic dislike 
sex is its independence of the will. Virtue, it is held, demands a 
complete control of the will over the body, but such control does 
not suffice to make the sexual act possible. The sexual act, there- 
fore, seems inconsistent with a perfectly virtuous life. 
1 ThtCityofGod,\\\, 15. 
379 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Ever since the Fall, the world has been divided into two cities, 
of which one shall reign eternally with God, the other shall be in 
eternal torment with Satan. Cain belongs to the city of the Devil, 
Abel to the City of God. Abel, by grace, and in virtue of pre- 
destination, was a pilgrim on earth and a citizen of heaven. The 
patriarchs belonged to the City of God. Discussion of the death 
of Methuselah brings St. Augustine to the vexed question of the 
comparison of the Septuagint with the Vulgate. The data, as given 
in the Septuagint, lead to the conclusion that Methuselah survived 
the flood by fourteen years, which is impossible, since he was not 
in the Ark. The Vulgate, following the Hebrew manuscripts, gives 
data from which it follows that he died in the year of the flood. On 
this point, St. Augustine holds that St. Jerome and the Hebrew 
manuscripts must be right. Some people maintained that the Jews 
had deliberately falsified the Hebrew manuscripts, out of malice 
towards the Christians; this hypothesis is rejected. On the other 
hand, the Septuagint must have been divinely inspired. The only 
conclusion is that Ptolemy's copyists made mistakes in transcribing 
the Septuagint. Speaking of the translations of the Old Testament, 
he says: "The Church has received that of the Seventy, as if there 
were no other, as many of the Greek Christians, using this wholly, 
know not whether there be or no. Our Latin translation is from 
this also. Although one Jerome, a learned priest, and a great 
linguist, has translated the same Scriptures from the Hebrew into 
Latin. But although the Jews affirm his learned labour to be all 
truth, and avouch the Seventy to have oftentimes erred, yet the 
Churches of Christ hold no one man to be preferred before so 
many, especially being selected by the high priest, for this work.*' 
He accepts the story of the miraculous agreement of the seventy 
independent translations, and considers this a proof that the 
Septuagint is divinely inspired. The Hebrew, however, is equally 
inspired. This conclusion leaves undecided the question as to the 
authority of Jerome's translation. Perhaps he might have been 
more decidedly on Jerome's side if the two Saints had not had a 
quarrel about St. Peter's time-serving propensities. 1 

He gives a synchronism of sacred and profane history. We learn 
that neas came to Italy when Abdon 3 was judge in Israel, and 

1 Galatians ii, 11-14. 

1 Of Abclon we know only that he had forty nons and thirty nephews, 
and that all these seventy rode donkeys (Judge* xii, 14). 

380 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

that the last persecution will be under Antichrist, but its date is 
unknown. 

After an admirable chapter against judicial torture, St. Augustine 
proceeds to combat the new Academicians, who hold all things 
to be doubtful. "The Church of Christ detests these doubts as 
madness, having a most certain knowledge of the things it appre- 
hends." We should believe in the truth of the Scriptures. He goes 
on to explain that there is no true virtue apart from true religion. 
Pagan virtue is " prostituted with the influence of obscene and 
filthy devils." What would be virtues in a Christian are vices in a 
pagan. "Those things which she [the soul] seems to account 
virtues, and thereby to sway her affections, if they be not all 
referred unto God, are indeed vices rather than virtues." They 
that are not of this society (the Church) shall suffer eternal misery. 
"In our conflicts here on earth, either the pain is victor, and so 
death expels the sense of it, or nature conquers, and expels the 
pain. But there, pain shall afflict eternally, and nature shall suffer 
eternally, both enduring to the continuance of the inflicted punish- 
ment." 

There are two resurrections, that of the soul at death, and that 
of the body at the Last Judgment. After a discussion of various 
difficulties concerning the millennium, and the subsequent doings 
of Gog and Magog, he comes to a text in II Thessalonians 
(ii, 11,12): "God shall send them strong delusion, that they should 
believe a lie, that they nil might be damned who believed not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." Some people might 
think it unjust that the Omnipotent should first deceive them, 
and then punish them for being deceived; but to St. Augustine 
this seems quite in order. "Being condemned, they are seduced, 
and, being seduced, condemned. But their seducement is by the 
secret judgment of God, justly secret, and secretly just; even His 
that hath judged continually, ever since the world began." St. 
Augustine holds that God divided mankind into the elect and the 
reprobate, not because of their merits or demerits, but arbitrarily. 
All alike deserve damnation, and therefore the reprobate have no 
ground of complaint. From the above passage of St. Paul, it 
appears that they are wicked because they are reprobate, not repro- 
bate because they are wicked. 

After the resurrection of the body, the bodies of the damned 
will burn eternally without being consumed. In this there is 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

nothing strange; it happens to the salamander and Mount Etna. 
Devils, though incorporeal, can be burnt by corporeal fire. Hell's 
torments are not purifying, and will not be lessened by the inter- 
cessions of saints. Origen erred in thinking hell not eternal. 
Heretics, and sinful Catholics, will be damned. 

The book ends with a description of the Saints' vision of God 
in heaven, and of the eternal felicity of die City of God. 

From the above summary, the importance of the work may not 
be clear. What was influential was the separation of Church and 
State, with the clear implication that the State could only be part 
of the City of God by being submissive towards the Church in all 
religious matters. This has been the doctrine of the Church ever 
since. All through the Middle Ages, during the gradual rise of 
the papal power, and throughout the conflict between Pope and 
Emperor, St. Augustine supplied the Western Church with the 
theoretical justification of its policy. The Jewish State, in the 
legendary time of the Judges, and in the historical period after 
the return from the Babylonian captivity, had been a theocracy; 
the Christian State should imitate it in this respect. The weakness 
of the emperors, and of most Western medieval monarchs, enabled 
the Church, to a great extent, to realize the ideal of the City of 
God. In the East, where the emperor was strong, this development 
never took place, and the Church remained much more subject 
to the State than it became in the West. 

The Reformation, which revived St. Augustine's doctrine of 
salvation, threw over his theocratic teaching, and became Eras- 
tian, 1 largely owing to the practical exigencies of the fight with 
Catholicism. But Protestant Erastianism was half-hearted, and the 
most religious among Protestants were still influenced by St. 
Augustine. Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy Men, and Quakers took 
over a part of his doctrine, but laid less stress on the Church. He 
held to predestination, and also to the need of baptism for salva- 
tion; these two doctrines do not harmonize well, and the extreme 
Protestants threw over the latter. But their eschatology remained 
Augustinian. 

The City of God contains little that is fundamentally original. 
The eschatology is Jewish in origin, and came into Christianity 
mainly through the Book of Revelation. The doctrine of prc- 

* Erasttanism is the doctrine that the Church should be subject to the 
State. 

382 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY 

destination and election is Pauline, though St. Augustine gave it 
a much fuller and more logical development than is to be found 
in the Epistles. The distinction between sacred and profane history 
is quite clearly set forth in the Old Testament. What St. Augustine 
did was to bring these elements together, and to relate them to 
the history of his own time, in such a way that the fall of the 
Western Empire, and the subsequent period of confusion, could 
be assimilated by Christians without any unduly severe trial of 
their faith. 

The Jewish pattern of history, past and future, is such as to 
make a powerful appeal to the oppressed and unfortunate at all 
times. St. Augustine adapted this pattern to Christianity, Marx 
to Socialism. To understand Marx psychologically, one should 
use the following dictionary : 

Yahweh = Dialectical Materialism 
The Messiah = Marx 

The Elect = The Proletariat 
The Church = The Communist Party 
The Second Coming = The Revolution 

Hell = Punishment of the Capitalists 

The Millennium = The Communist Commonwealth 

* 

The terms on the left give the emotional content of the terms 
on the right, and it is this emotional content, familiar to those who 
have had a Christian or a Jewish upbringing, that makes Marx's 
eschatology credible. A similar dictionary could be made for the 
Nazis, but their conceptions are more purely Old Testament and 
less Christian than those of Marx, and their Messiah is more 
analogous to the Maccabees than to Christ. 



III. THE PELAGIAN CONTROVERSY 

Much of the most influential part of St. Augustine's theology 
was concerned in combating the Pelagian heresy. Pelagius was a 
Welshman, whose real name was Morgan, which means "man of 
the sea," as "Pelagius" does in Greek. He was a cultivated and 
agreeable ecclesiastic, less fanatical than many of his contem- 
poraries. He believed in free will, questioned the doctrine of 
original sin, and thought that, when men act virtuously, it is by 

383 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

reason of their own moral effort. If they act rightly, and are 
orthodox, they go to heaven as a reward of their virtues. 

These views, though they may now seem commonplace, caused, 
at the time, a great commotion, and were, largely through St. 
Augustine's efforts, declared heretical. They had, however, a 
considerable temporary success. Augustine had to write to the 
patriarch of Jerusalem to warn him against the wily heresiarch, 
who had persuaded many Eastern theologians to adopt his views. 
Even after his condemnation, other people, called semi-Pelagians, 
advocated weakened forms of his doctrines. It was a long time 
before the purer teaching of the Saint was completely victorious, 
especially in France, where the final condemnation of the semi- 
Pelagian heresy took place at the Council of Orange in 529. 

St. Augustine taught that Adam, before the Fall, had had free 
will, and could have abstained from sin. But as he and Eve ate the 
apple, corruption entered into them, and descended to all their 
posterity, none of whom can, of their own power, abstain from 
sin. Only God's grace enables men to be virtuous. Since we all 
inherit Adam's sin, we all deserve eternal damnation. All who die 
unbaptized, even infants, mil go to hell and suffer unending 
torment. We have no reason to complain of this, since we are all 
wicked. (In the Confessions, the Saint enumerates the crimes of 
which he was guilty in the cradle.) But by God's free grace certain 
people, among those who have been baptized, are chosen to go 
to heaven ; these are the elect. They do not go to heaven because 
they are good; we are all totally depraved, except in so far as 
God's grace, which is only bestowed on the elect, enables us to 
be otherwise. No reason can be given why some are saved and the 
rest damned; this is due to God's unmotived choice. Damnation 
proves God's justice; salvation, His mercy. Both equally display 
His goodness. 

The arguments in favour of this ferocious doctrine which was 
revived by Calvin, and has since then not been held by the Catholic 
Church are to be found in the writings of St. Paul, particularly 
the Epistle to the Romans. These are treated by Augustine as a 
lawyer treats the law: the interpretation is able, and the texts are 
made to yield their utmost meaning. One is persuaded, at the end, 
not that St. Paul believed what Augustine deduces, but that, 
taking certain texts in isolation, they do imply just what he says 
they do. It may seem odd that the damnation of unbaptized infants 

384 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

should not have been thought shocking, but should have been 
attributed to a good God. The conviction of sin, however, so 
dominated him that he really believed new-born children to be 
limbs of Satan. A great deal of what is most ferocious in the 
medieval Church is traceable to his gloomy sense of universal 
guilt. 

There is only one intellectual difficulty that really troubles St. 
Augustine. This is not that it seems a pity to have created Man, 
since the immense majority of the human race are predestined to 
eternal torment. What troubles him is that, if original sin is 
inherited from Adam, as St. Paul teaches, the soul, as well as the 
body, must be propagated by the parents, for sin is of the soul, 
not the body. He sees difficulties in this doctrine, but says that, 
since Scripture is silent, it cannot be necessary to salvation to 
arrive at a just view on the matter. He therefore leaves it undecided. 

It is strange that the last men of intellectual eminence before 
the dark ages were concerned, not with saving civilization or 
expelling the barbarians or reforming the abuses of the adminis- 
tration, but with preaching the merit of virginity and the damna- 
tion of unbaptized infants. Seeing that these were the preoccupa- 
tions that the Church handed on to the converted barbarians, it 
is no wonder that the succeeding age surpassed almost all other 
fully historical periods in cruelty and superstition. 



History of W*tt*r Pkihsof>ky 385 N 



Chapter V 
THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

^ IHE fifth century was that of the barbarian invasion and 
I the fall of the Western Empire. After the death of 

JL Augustine in 430, there was little philosophy; it was a 
century of destructive action, which, however, largely determined 
the lines upon which Europe was to be developed. It was in this 
century that the English invaded Britain, causing it to become 
England; it was also in this century that the Prankish invasion 
turned Gaul into France, and that the Vandals invaded Spain, 
giving their name to Andalusia. St. Patrick, during the middle 
years of the century, converted the Irish to Christianity. Through- 
out the Western World, rough Germanic kingdoms succeeded the 
centralized bureaucracy of the Empire. The imperial post ceased, 
the great roads fell into decay, war put an end to large-scale 
commerce, and life again became local both politically and 
economically. Centralized authority was preserved only in the 
Church, and there with much difficulty. 

Of the Germanic tribes that invaded the Empire in the fifth 
century, the most important were the Goths. They were pushed 
westwards by the Huns, who attacked them from the East. At 
first they tried to conquer the Eastern Empire, but were defeated ; 
then they turned upon Italy. Since Diocletian, they had been 
employed as Roman mercenaries ; this had taught them more of 
the art of war than barbarians would otherwise have known. 
Alaric, king of the Goths, sacked Rome in 410, but died the same 
year. Odovaker, king of the Ostrogoths, put an end to the Western 
Empire in 476, and reigned until 493, when he was treacherously 
murdered by another Ostrogoth, Theodoric, who was king of 
Italy until 526. Of him I shall have more to say shortly. He was 
important both in history and legend; in the Niebelungenlicd he 
appears as "Dietrich von Bern" (**Bern" being Verona). 

Meanwhile the Vandals established themselves in Africa, the 
Visigoths in the south of France, and the Franks in the north. 

In the middle of the Germanic invasion came the inroads of the 
Huns under Attila, The Huns were of Mongol race, and yet they 
were often allied with the Goths. At the crucial moment, however, 

386 



THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

when they invaded Gaul in 451, they had quarrelled with the 
Goths; the Goths and Romans together defeated them in that 
year at Chalons. Attila then turned against Italy, and thought of 
marching on Rome, but Pope Leo dissuaded him, pointing out 
that Alaric had died after sacking Rome. His forbearance, how- 
ever, did him no service, for he died in the following year. After 
his death the power of the Huns collapsed. 

During this period of confusion the Church was troubled by a 
complicated controversy on the Incarnation. The protagonists in 
the debates were two ecclesiastics, Cyril and Nestorius, of whom, 
more or less by accident, the former was proclaimed a saint and 
the latter a heretic. St. Cyril was patriarch of Alexandria from 
about 412 till his death in 444; Nestorius was patriarch of Con- 
stantinople. The question at issue was the relation of Christ's 
divinity to His humanity. Were there two Persons, one human 
and one divine ? This was the view held by Nestorius. If not, was 
there only one nature, or were there two natures in one person, 
a human nature and a divine nature ? These questions roused, in 
the fifth century, an almost incredible degree of passion and fury. 
"A secret and incurable discord was cherished between those who 
were most apprehensive of confounding, and those who were most 
fearful of separating, the divinity and the humanity of Christ." 1 

St. Cyril, the advocate of unity, was a man of fanatical zeal. He 
used his position as patriarch to incite pogroms against the very large 
Jewish colony in Alexandria. His chief claim to fame is the lynching 
of Hypatia, a distinguished lady who, in an age of bigotry, adhered 
to the Neoplatonic philosophy and devoted her talents to mathe- 
matics. She was "torn from her chariot, stripped naked, dragged 
to the church, and inhumanly butchered by the hands of Peter 
the Reader and a troop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh 
was scraped from her bones with sharp oyster-shells and her 
quivering limbs were delivered to the flames. The just progress 
of inquiry and punishment was stopped by seasonable gifts." 2 
After this, Alexandria was no longer troubled by philosophers. 

St. Cyril was pained to learn that Constantinople was being led 
astray by the teaching of its patriarch Nestorius, who maintained 
that there were two Persons in Christ, one human and one divine. 
On this ground Nestorius objected to the new practice of calling 
the Virgin "Mother of God"; she was, he said, only the mother 

1 Gibbon, op. cit. t chap, xlvii, * Ibid. 

387 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of the human Person, while the divine Person, who was God, had 
no mother. On this question the Church was divided: roughly 
speaking, bishops east of Suez favoured Nestorius, while those 
west of Suez favoured St. Cyril. A council was summoned to 
meet at Ephesus in 431 to decide the question. The Western 
bishops arrived firsthand proceeded to lock the doors against late- 
comers and decide in hot haste for St. Cyril, who presided. "This 
episcopal tumult, at the distance of thirteen centuries, assumes 
the venerable aspect of the third oecumenical Council." 1 

As a result of this council, Nestorius was condemned as a heretic. 
He did not recant, but was the founder of the Nestorian sect, 
which had a large following in Syria and throughout the East. 
Some centuries later, Nestorianism was so strong in China that 
it seemed to have a chance of becoming the established religion. 
Nestorians were found in India by the Spanish and Portuguese 
missionaries in the sixteenth century. The persecution of Nes- 
torianism by the Catholic government of Constantinople caused 
disaffection which helped the Mohammedans in their conquest 
of Syria. 

The tongue of Nestorius, which by its eloquence had seduced 
so many, was eaten by worms so at least we are assured. 

Ephesus had learnt to substitute the Virgin for Artemis, but had 
still the same intemperate zeal for its goddess as in the time of St. 
Paul. It was said that the Virgin was buried there. In 449, after the 
death of St. Cyril, a synod at Ephesus tried to carry the triumph 
further, and thereby fell into the heresy opposite to that of Nes- 
torius; this is called the Monophysite heresy, and maintains that 
Christ has only one nature. If St. Cyril had still been alive, he 
would certainly have supported this view, and have become 
heretical. The Emperor supported the synod, but the Pope repu- 
diated it. At last Pope Leothe same Pope who turned Attila 
from attacking Rome in the year of the battle of Chalons secured 
the summoning of an oecumenical council at Chalcedon in 451, 
which condemned the Monophysites and finally decided the ortho- 
dox doctrine of the Incarnation. The Council of Ephesus had 
decided that there is only one Person of Christ, but the Council of 
Chalcedon decided that He exists in two natures, one human and 
one divine. The influence of the Pope was paramount in securing 
this decision. 

1 Gibbon, op. *&, chip xlvii. 

388 



THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

The Monophysites, like the Nestorians, refused to submit. 
Egypt, almost to a man, adopted their heresy, which spread up the 
Nile and as far as Abyssinia. The heresy of the Abyssinians was 
given by Mussolini as one of his reasons for conquering them. The 
heresy of Egypt, like the opposite heresy of Syria, facilitated the 
Arab conquest. 

During the sixth century, there were four men of great im- 
portance in the history of culture: Boethius, Justinian, Benedict, 
and Gregory the Great. They will be my chief concern in the 
remainder of this chapter and in the next. 

The Gothic conquest of Italy did not put an end to Roman 
civilization. Under Theodoric, king of Italy and of the Goths, the 
civil administration of Italy was entirely Roman; Italy enjoyed 
peace and religious toleration (till near the end); the king was 
both wise and vigorous. He appointed consuls, preserved Roman 
law, and kept up the Senate: when in Rome, his first visit was to 
the Senate House. 

Though an Arian, Theodoric was on good terms with the 
Church until his last years. In 523, the Emperor Justin proscribed 
Arianism, and this annoyed Theodoric. He had reason for fear, 
since Italy was Catholic and was led by theological sympathy to 
side with the Emperor. He believed, rightly or wrongly, that 
there was a plot involving men in his own government. This led 
him to imprison and execute his minister, the senator Boethius, 
whose Consolations of Philosophy was written while he was in 
prison. 

Boethius is a singular figure. Throughout the Middle Ages he 
was read and admired, regarded always as a devout Christian, 
and treated almost as if he had been one of the Fathers. Yet his 
Consolations of Philosophy, written in 524 while he was awaiting 
execution, is purely Platonic; it does not prove that he was not 
a Christian, but it does show that pagan philosophy had a much 
stronger hold on him than Christian theology. Some theological 
works, especially one on the Trinity, which are attributed to him, 
are by many authorities considered to be spurious; but it was 
probably owing to them that the Middle Ages were able to regard 
him as orthodox, and to imbibe from him much Platonism which 
would otherwise have been viewed with suspicion. 

The work is an alternation of verse and prose: Boethius, in his 
own person, speaks in prose, while Philosophy answers in verse. 

389 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

There is a certain resemblance to Dante, who was no doubt 
influenced by him in the Vita Nuova. 

The Consolations, which Gibbon rightly calls a "golden volume," 
begins by the statement that Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are the 
true philosophers; Stoics, Epicureans, and the rest are usurpers 
whom the profane multitude mistook for the friends of philosophy. 
Boethius says he obeyed the Pythagorean command to "follow 
God" (not the Christian command). Happiness, which is the same 
thing as blessedness, is the good, not pleasure. Friendship is a 
"most sacred thing." There is much morality that agrees closely 
with Stoic doctrine, and is in fact largely taken from Seneca. 
There is a summary, in verse, of the beginning of the Timaeus. 
This is followed by a great deal of purely Platonic metaphysics. 
Imperfection, we are told, is a lack, implying the existence of a 
perfect pattern. He adopted the privative theory of evil. He then 
passes on to a pantheism which should have shocked Christians, but 
for some reason did not. Blessedness and God, he says, are both the 
chiefest good, and are therefore identical. "Men are made happy 
by the obtaining of divinity." "They who obtain divinity become 
gods. Wherefore every one that is happy is a god, but by nature 
there is only one God, but there may be many by participation. 
"The sum, origin, and cause of all that is sought after is rightly 
thought to be goodness." "The substance of God consisteth in 
nothing else but in goodness." Can God do evil? No. Therefore 
evil is nothing, since God can do everything. Virtuous men are 
always powerful, and bad men always weak; for both desire the 
good, but only the virtuous get it. The wicked are more unfor- 
tunate if they escape punishment than if they suffer it. "In wise 
men there is no place for hatred." 

The tone of the book is more like that of Plato than that of 
Plotinus. There is no trace of the superstition or morbidness of 
the age, no obsession with sin, no excessive straining after the 
unattainable. There is perfect philosophic calm so much that, 
if the book had been written in prosperity, it might almost have 
been called smug. Written when it was, in prison under sentence 
of death, it is as admirable as the last moments of the Platonic 
Socrates. 

One does not find a similar outlook until after Newton. I will 
quote in extenso one poem from the book, which, in its philosophy, 
is not unlike Pope's Essay an Man. 

39 



THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

If Thou wouldst sec 

God's laws with purest mind, 

Thy sight on heaven fixed must be, 

Whose settled course the stars in peace doth bind. 

The sun's bright fire 

Stops not his sister's team. 

Nor doth the northern bear desire 

Within the ocean's wave to hide her beam. 

Though she behold 

The other stars there crouching, 

Yet she incessantly is rolled 

About high heaven, the ocean never touching. 

The evening light 

With certain course doth show 

The coming of the shady night, 

And Lucifer before the day doth go. 

This mutual love 

Courses eternal makes, 

And from the starry spheres above 

All cause of war and dangerous discord takes. 

This sweet consent 

In equal bands doth tie 

The nature of each element 

So that the moist things yield unto the dry. 

The piercing cold 

With flames doth friendship heap 

The trembling fire the highest place doth hold, 

And the gross earth sinks down into the deep. 

The flowery year 

Breathes odours in the spring, 

The scorching summer corn doth bear, 

The autumn fruit from laden trees doth faring. 

The falling rain 

Doth winter's moisture iive. 

These rules thus nourish and maintain 

All creatures which we see on earth to live. 

And when they die, 

These bring them to their end, 

While their Creator sits on high, 

Whose hand the reins of the whole world doth bend. 

He as their king 

Rules them with lordly might. 

From Him they rise, flourish, and spring, 

He as their law and judge decides their right. 

39' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Those things whose course 

Most swiftly glides away 

His might doth often backward force, 

And suddenly their wandering motion stay. 

Unless his strength 

Their violence should bound, 

And them which else would run at length, 

Should bring within the compass of a round, 

That firm decree 

Which now doth all adorn 

Would soon destroyed and broken be, 

Things being far from their beginning borne. 

This powerful love 

Is common unto all, 

Which for desire of good do move 

Back to the springs from whence they first did fall. 

No worldly thing 

Can a continuance have 

Unless love back again it bring 

Unto the cause which first the essence gave. 

Boethius was, until the end, a friend of Theodoric. His father 
was consul, he was consul, and so were his two sons. His father- 
in-law Symmachus (probably grandson of the one who had a 
controversy with Ambrose about the statue of Victory) was an 
important man in the court of the Gothic king. Theodoric em- 
ployed Boethius to reform the coinage, and to astonish less 
sophisticated barbarian kings with such devices as sun-dials and 
water-docks. It may be that his freedom from superstition was 
not so exceptional in Roman aristocratic families as elsewhere; 
but its combination with great learning and zeal for the public 
good was unique in that age. During the two centuries before his 
time and the ten centuries after it, I cannot think of any European 
man of learning so free from superstition and fanaticism. Nor are 
his merits merely negative; his survey is lofty, disinterested, and 
sublime. He would have been remarkable in any age; in the age 
in which he lived, he is utterly amazing. 

The medieval reputation of Boethius was .partly due to his 
being regarded as a martyr to Arian persecution a view which 
began two or three hundred years after his death. In Pa via, he 
was regarded as a saint , but in fact he was not canonized. Though 
Cyril was a saint, Boethius was not. 

393 



THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CENTURIES 

Two years after the execution of Boethius, Theodoric died. In 
the next year, Justinian became Emperor. He reigned until 565, 
and in this long time managed to do much harm and some good. 
He is of course chiefly famous for his Digest, but I shall not venture 
on this topic, which is one for the lawyers. He was a man of deep 
piety, which he signalized, two years after his accession, by closing 
the schools of philosophy in Athens, where paganism still reigned. 
The dispossessed philosophers betook themselves to Persia, where 
the king received them kindly. But they were shocked more so, 
says Gibbon, than became philosophers by the Persian practices 
of polygamy and incest, so they returned home again, and faded 
into obscurity. Three years after this exploit (532), Justinian 
embarked upon another, more worthy of praise the building of 
St. Sophia. I have never seen St. Sophia, but I have seen the 
beautiful contemporary mosaics at Ravenna, including portraits 
of Justinian and his empress Theodora. Both were very pious, 
though Theodora was a lady of easy virtue whom he had picked 
up in the circus. What is even worse, she was inclined to be a 
Monophysite. 

But enough of scandal. The Emperor himself, I am happy to 
say, was of impeccable orthodoxy, even in the matter of the 
"Three Chapters." This was a vexatious controversy. The Council 
of Chalcedon had pronounced orthodox three Fathers suspected 
of Nestorianism ; Theodora, along with many others, accepted all 
the other decrees of the council, but not this one. The Western 
Church stood by everything decided by the Council, and the 
empress was driven to persecute the Pope. Justinian adored her, 
and after her death in 548, she became to him what the dead 
Prince Consort was to Queen Victoria. So in the end he lapsed 
into heresy, that of Aphthartodocctism. A contemporary historian 
(Evagrius) writes: "Having since the end of his life received the 
wages of his misdeeds, he has gone to seek the justice which was 
his due before the judgment-seat of hell." 

Justinian aspired to reconquer as much as possible of the 
Western Empire. In 535 he invaded Italy, and at first had quick 
success against the Goths. The Catholic population welcomed 
him, and he came as representing Rome against the barbarians. 
But the Goths rallied, and the war lasted eighteen years, during 
which Rome, and Italy generally, suffered far more than in the 
barbarian invasion. 

393 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Rome was five times captured, thrice by Byzantines, twice by 
Goths, and sank to a small town. The same sort of thing happened 
in Africa, which Justinian also more or less reconquered. At first 
his armies were welcomed; then it was found that Byzantine 
administration was corrupt end Byzantine taxes were ruinous. 
In the end, many people wished the Goths and Vandals back. 
The Church, however, until his last years, was steadily on the 
side of the Emperor, because of his orthodoxy. He did not attempt 
the reconquest of Gaul, partly because of distance, but partly also 
because the Franks were orthodox. 

In 568, three years after Justinian's death, Italy was invaded 
by a new and very fierce German tribe, the Lombards. Wars 
between them and the Byzantines continued intermittently for 
two hundred years, until nearly the time of Charlemagne. The 
Byzantines held gradually less and less of Italy; in the South, 
they had also to face the Saracens. Rome remained nominally 
subject to them, and the popes treated the Kastern emperors with 
deference. But in most parts of Italy the emperors, after the 
coming of the Lombards, had very little authority or even none 
at all. It was this period that ruined Italian civilization. It was 
refugees from the Lombards who founded Venice, not, as tradition 
avers, fugitives from Attila. 



394 



Chapter VI 
ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

-TTN the general decay of civilization that came about during the 
I incessant wars of the sixth and succeeding centuries, it was 
JL above all the Church that preserved whatever survived of the 
culture of ancient Rome. The Church performed this work very 
imperfectly, because fanaticism and superstition prevailed among 
even the greatest ecclesiastics of thp time, and secular learning 
was thought wicked. Nevertheless, ecclesiastical institutions 
created a solid framework, within which, in later times, a revival 
of learning and civilized arts became possible. 

In the period with which we are concerned, three of the activities 
of the Church call for special notice: first, the monastic movement; 
second, the influence of the papacy, especially under Gregory the 
Great; third, the conversion of the heathen barbarians by means 
of missions. I will say something about each of these in succession. 

The monastic movement began simultaneously in Egypt and 
Syria about the beginning of the fourth century. It had two forms, 
that of solitary hermits, and that of monasteries. St. Anthony, the 
first of the hermits, was born in Egypt about 250, and withdrew 
from the world about 270. For fifteen years he lived alone in a 
hut near his home; then, for twenty years, in remote solitude in 
the desert. But his fame spread, and multitudes longed to hear 
him preach. Accordingly, about 305, he came forth to teach, and 
to encourage the hermit's life. He practised extreme austerities, 
reducing food, drink, and sleep to the minimum required to 
support life. The devil constantly assailed him with lustful visions, 
but he manfully withstood the malign diligence of Satan. By the 
end of his life, the Thebaid 1 was full of hermits who had been 
inspired by his example and his precepts. 

A few years later about 315 or 320 another Egyptian, Pacho- 
mius, founded the first monastery. Here the monks had a common 
life, without private property, with communal meals and com- 
munal religious observances. It was in this form, rather than in 
that of St. Anthony, that monasticism conquered the Christian 
world. In the monasteries derived from Pachomius, the monks 
1 The desert near Egyptian Thebes. 
395 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

did much work, chiefly agricultural, instead of spending the whole 
of their time in resisting the temptations of the flesh. 

At about the same time, monasticism sprang up in Syria and 
Mesopotamia. Here asceticism was carried to even greater lengths 
than in Egypt. St. Simeon Stylites and the other pillar hermits 
were Syrian. It was from the East that monasticism came to Greek- 
speaking countries, chiefly owing to St. Basil (about 360). His 
monasteries were less ascetic; they had orphanages, and schools 
for boys (not only for such as intended to become monks). 

At first, monasticism was a spontaneous movement, quite out- 
side Church organization. It was St. Athanasius who reconciled 
ecclesiastics to it. Partly as a result of his influence, it came to be 
the rule that monks should be priests. It was he also, while he 
was in Rome in 339, who introduced the movement into the West. 
St. Jerome did much to promote it, and St. Augustine introduced 
it into Africa. St. Martin of Tours inaugurated monasteries in 
Gaul, St. Patrick in Ireland. The monastery of lona was founded 
by St. Columba in 566. In early days, before monks had been 
fined into the ecclesiastical organization, they had been a source 
of disorder. To begin with, there was no way of discriminating 
between genuine ascetics and men who, being destitute, found 
monastic establishments comparatively luxurious. Then again 
there was the difficulty that the monks gave a turbulent support 
to their favourite bishop, causing synods (and almost causing 
Councils) to fall into heresy. The synod (not the Council) of 
Ephesus, which decided for the Monophysites, was under a 
monkish reign of terror. But for the resistance of the Pope, the 
victory of the Monophysites might have been permanent. In 
later times, such disorders no longer occurred. 

There seem to have been nuns before there were monks as 
early as the middle of the third century. 

Cleanliness was viewed with abhorrence. Lice were called 
"pearls of God," and were a mark of saintliness. Saints, male and 
female, would boast that water had never touched their feet except 
when they had to cross rivers. In later centuries, monks served 
many useful purposes: they were skilled agriculturists, and some 
of them kept alive or revived learning. But in the beginning, 
especially in the eremitic section, there was none of this. Most 
monks did no work, never read anything except what religion 
prescribed, and conceived virtue in an entirely negative manner, 

396 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

as abstention from sin, especially the sins of the flesh. St. Jerome, 
it is true, took his library with him into the desert, but he came to 
think that this had been a sin. 

In Western monasticism, the most important name is that of 
St. Benedict, the founder of the Benedictine Order. He was born 
about 480, near Spoleto, of a noble Umbrian family; at the age 
of twenty, he fled from the luxuries and pleasures of Rome to 
the solitude of a cave, where he lived for three years. After this 
period, his life was less solitary, and about the year 520 he founded 
the famous monastery of Monte Cassino, for which he drew up 
the "Benedictine rule." This was adapted to Western climates, 
and demanded less austerity than had been common among 
Egyptian and Syrian monks. There had been an unedifying com- 
petition in ascetic extravagance, the most extreme practitioner 
being considered the most holy. To this St. Benedict put an end, 
decreeing that austerities going beyond the rule could only be 
practised by permission of the abbot. The abbot was given great 
power ; he was elected for life, and had (within the Rule and the 
limits of orthodoxy) an almost despotic control over his monks, 
who were no longer allowed, as previously, to leave their monastery 
for another if they felt so inclined. In later times, Benedictines 
have been remarkable for learning, but at first all their reading 
was devotional. 

Organizations have a life of their own, independent of the 
intentions of their founders. Of this fact, the most striking example 
is the Catholic Church, which would astonish Jesus, and even 
Paul. The Benedictine Order is a lesser example. The monks take 
a vow of poverty, obedience, and chastity. As to this, Gibbon 
remarks: "I have somewhere heard or read the frank confession 
of a Benedictine abbot: 'My vow of poverty has given me an 
hundred thousand crowns a year; my vow of obedience has raised 
me to the rank of a sovereign prince.' I forget the consequences 
of his vow of chastity." 1 The departures of the Order from the 
founder's intentions were, however, by no means all regrettable. 
This is true, in particular, of learning. The library of Monte 
Cassino was famous, and in various ways the world is much 
indebted to the scholarly tastes of later Benedictines. 

St. Benedict lived at Monte Cassino from its foundation until 
his death in 543. The monastery was sacked by the Lombards, 
1 Op. cit. t xxxvii, note 57. 

397 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

shortly before Gregory the Great, himself a Benedictine, became 
Pope. The monks fled to Rome; but when the fury of the 
Lombards had abated, they returned to Monte Cassino. 

From the dialogues of Pope Gregory the Great, written in 593, 
we learn much about St. Benedict. He was "brought up at Rome 
in the study of humanity. But forasmuch as he saw many by the 
reason of such learning to fall to dissolute and lewd life, he drew 
back his foot, which he had as it were now set forth into the world, 
lest, entering too far in acquaintance therewith, he likewise might 
have fallen into that dangerous and godless gulf: wherefore, giving 
over his book, and forsaking his father's house and wealth, with 
a resolute mind only to serve God, he sought for some place, 
where he might attain to the desire of his holy purpose: and in 
this sort he departed, instructed with learned ignorance, and 
furnished with unlearned wisdom." 

He immediately acquired the power to work miracles. The first 
of these was the mending of a broken sieve by means of prayer. 
The townsmen hung the sieve over the church door, and it "con- 
tinued there many years after, even to these very troubles of the 
Lombards." Abandoning the sieve, he went to his cave, unknown 
to all but one friend, who secretly supplied him with food let 
down by a rope, to which a bell was tied to let the saint know 
when his dinner had come. But Satan threw a stone at the rope, 
breaking both it and the bell. Nevertheless, the enemy of mankind 
was foiled in his hope of disrupting the Saint's food-supply. 

When Benedict had been as long in the cave as God's purposes 
required, our Lord appeared on Easter Sunday to a certain priest, 
revealed the hermit's whereabouts, and bade him share his Easter 
feast with the Saint. About the same time certain shepherds 
found him. "At the first, when they espied him through the bushes, 
and saw his apparel made of skins, they verily thought that it 
had been some beast: but after they were acquainted with the 
r \ju*nt of God, many of them were by his means convened from 
jfce ot'-^tly life to grace, piety, and devotion." 
, flesh- na ner hermits, Benedict suffered from the temptations oi 
a, tb* lptt A certain woman there was which some time he had 
toemory of which the wicked spirit put into his mind, 
*k c *** memory of her did so mightily inflame with concupis- 
mi of God's servant, which did so increase that, almost 
ith pleasure, he was of mind to have forsaken the 

398 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

wilderness. But suddenly, assisted with God's grace, he came to 
himself; and seeing many thick briers and nettle bushes to grow 
hard by, off he cast his apparel, and threw himself into the midst 
of them, and there wallowed so long that, when he rose up, all 
his flesh was pitifully torn: and so by the wounds of his body, 
he cured the wounds of his soul." 

His fame being spread abroad, the monks of a certain monastery, 
whose abbot had lately died, besought him to accept the succession. 
He did so, and insisted upon observance of strict virtue, so that 
the monks, in a rage, decided to poison him with a glass of poisoned 
wine. He, however, made the sign of the cross over the glass, 
whereupon it broke in pieces. So he returned to the wilderness. 

The miracle of the sieve was not the only practically useful one 
performed by St. Benedict. One day, a virtuous Goth was using a 
bill-hook to clear away briers, when the head of it flew off the 
handle and fell into deep water. The Saint, being informed, held 
the handle in the water, whereupon the iron head rose up and 
joined itself again to the handle. 

A neighbouring priest, envious of the holy man's reputation, sent 
him a poisoned loaf. But Benedict miraculously knew it was 
poisoned. He had the habit of giving bread to a certain crow, and 
when the crow came on the day in question, the Saint said to it: 
"In the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, take up that loaf, and 
leave it in some such place where no man may find it." The crow 
obeyed, and on its return was given its usual dinner. The wicked 
priest, seeing he could not kill Benedict's body, decided to kill 
his soul, and sent seven naked young women into the monastery. 
The Saint feared lest some of the younger monks might be moved 
to sin, and therefore departed himself, that the priest might no 
longer have a motive for such acts. But the priest was killed by 
the ceiling of his room's falling on him. A monk pursued Benedict 
with the news, rejoicing, and bidding him return. Benedict 
mourned over the death of the sinner, and imposed a penance 
on the monk for rejoicing. 

Gregory does not only relate miracles, but deigns, now and 
then, to tell facts in the career of St. Benedict. After founding 
twelve monasteries, he finally came to Monte Cassino, where 
there was a "chapel" to Apollo, still used by the country people 
for heathen worship. "Even to that very time, the mad multitude 
of infidels did offer most wicked sacrifice/* Benedict destroyed 

399 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the altar, substituted a church, and converted the neighbouring 
pagans. Satan was annoyed: 

"The old enemy of mankind, not taking this in good part, did 
not now privily or in a dream, but in open sight present himself 
to the eyes of that holy father, and with great outcries complained 
that he had offered him violence. The noise which he made, the 
monks did hear, but himself they could not see; but, as the 
venerable father told them, he appeared visibly unto him most fell 
and cruel, and as though, with his fiery mouth and flaming eyes, 
he would have torn him in pieces: what the devil said unto him, 
all the monks did hear; for first he would call him by his name, 
and because the man of God vouchsafed him not any answer, 
then would he fall a reviling and railing at him : for when he cried 
out, calling him "Blessed Bennet,' and yet found that he gave him 
no answer, straightways he would turn his tune and say: 'Cursed 
Bennet, and not blessed: what hast thou to do with me? and why 
dost thou thus persecute me?' " Here the story ends; one gathers 
that Satan gave up in despair. 

I have quoted at some length from these dialogues, because they 
have a threefold importance. First, they are the principal source 
for our knowledge of the life of St. Benedict, whose Rule became 
the model for all Western monasteries except those of Ireland or 
founded by Irishmen. Secondly, they give a vivid picture of the 
mental atmosphere among the most civilized people living at the 
end of the sixth century. Thirdly, they are written by Pope 
Gregory the Great, fourth and last of the Doctors of the Western 
Church, and politically one of the most eminent of the popes. 
To him we must now turn our attention. 

The Venerable W. H. Hutton, Archdeacon of Northampton, 1 
claims that Gregory was the greatest man of the sixth century; 
the only rival claimants, hc^ays, would be Justinian and St. Bene- 
dict. All three, certainly, had a profound effect on future ages: 
Justinian by his Laws (not by his conquests, which were ephe- 
meral); Benedict by his monastic order; and Gregory by the 
increase of papal power which he brought about. In the dialogues 
that I have been quoting he appears childish and credulous, but 
as a statesman he is astute, masterful, and very well aware of 
what can be achieved in the complex and changing world in 
which he has to operate. The contrast is surprising; but the 
1 Cambridge Medieval History t II, chap. viii. 
400 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

most effective men of action are often intellectually second- 
rate. 

Gregory the Great, the first Pope of that name, was born in 
Rome, about 540, of a rich and noble family. It seems his grand- 
father had been Pope after he became a widower. He himself, as a 
young man, had a palace and immense wealth. He had what was 
considered a good education, though it did not include a know- 
ledge of Greek, which he never acquired, although he lived for 
six years in Constantinople. In 573 he was prefect of the City of 
Rome. But religion claimed him: he resigned his office, gave his 
wealth to the founding of monasteries and to charity, and turned 
his own palace into a house for monks, himself becoming a Bene- 
dictine. He devoted himself to meditation, and to austerities 
which permanently injured his health. But Pope Pelagius II had 
become aware of his political abilities, and sent him as his envoy 
to Constantinople, to which, since Justinian's time, Rome was 
nominally subject. Gregory lived in Constantinople from 579 to 
585, representing papal interests at the Emperor's court, and papal 
theology in discussions with Eastern ecclesiastics, who were always 
more prone to heresy than those of the West. The patriarch of 
Constantinople, at this time, held the erroneous opinion that our 
resurrection bodies will be impalpable, but Gregory saved the 
Emperor from falling into this departure from the true faith. He 
was unable, however, to persuade the Emperor to undertake a 
campaign against the Lombards, which was the principal object 
of his mission. 

The five years 585-90 Gregory spent as head of his monastery. 
Then the Pope died, and Gregory succeeded him. The times were 
difficult, but by their very confusion offered great opportunities 
to an able statesman. The Lombards were ravaging Italy; Spain 
and Africa were in a state of anarchy due to the weakness of the 
Byzantines and the decadence of Visigoths and the depredations 
of Moors. In France there were wars between North and South. 
Britain, which had been Christian under the Romans, had re- 
verted to paganism since the Saxon invasion. There were still 
remnants of Arianism, and the heresy of the Three Chapters was 
by no means extinct. The turbulent times infected even bishops, 
many of whom led far from exemplary lives. Simony was rife, 
and remained a crying evil until the latter half of the eleventh 
century. 

401 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

All these sources of trouble Gregory combated with energy and 
sagacity. Before his pontificate, the bishop of Rome, though 
acknowledged to be the greatest man in the hierarchy, was not 
regarded as having any jurisdiction outside his own diocese. St. 
Ambrose, for example, who was on the best of terms with the 
Pope of his day, obviously never regarded himself as in any degree 
subject to his authority. Gregory, owing partly to his personal 
qualities and partly to the prevailing anarchy, was able to assert 
successfully an authority which was admitted by ecclesiastics 
throughout the West, and even, to a lesser degree, in the East. 
He exerted this authority chiefly by means of letters to bishops 
and secular rulers in all parts of the Roman world, but also in 
other ways. His Book of Pastoral Rule, containing advice to bishops, 
had a great influence throughout the earlier Middle Ages. It was 
intended as a guide to the duties of bishops, and was accepted as 
such. He wrote it in the first instance for the bishop of Ravenna, 
and sent it also to the bishop of Seville. Under Charlemagne, it 
was given to bishops at consecration. Alfred the Great translated 
it into Anglo-Saxon. In the East it was circulated in Greek. It 
gives sound, if not surprising, advice to bishops, such as not to 
neglect business. It tells them also that rulers should not be 
criticized, but should be kept alive to the danger of hell-fire if 
they fail to follow the advice of the Church. 

Gregory's letters are extraordinarily interesting:, not only as 
showing his character, but as giving a picture of his age. His tone, 
except to the Emperor and the ladies of the Byzantine court, is 
that of a head master sometimes commending, often reproving, 
never showing the faintest hesitation as to his right to give orders. 

Let us take as a sample his letters during one year (599). The 
first is a letter to the bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia, who, though 
old, was bad. It says, in part: "It has been told me that on the 
Lord's day, before celebrating the solemnities of mass, thou 
wentest forth to plough up the crop of the bearer of these presents. 
. . . Also, after the solemnities of mass thou didst not fear to root 
up the landmarks of that possession. . . . Seeing that we still 
spare thy grey hairs, bethink thee at length, old man, and restrain 
thyself from such levity of .behaviour, and perversity of deeds/' 
He writes at the same time to the secular authorities of Sardinia 
on the same subject. The bishop in question next has to be re- 
proved because he makes a charge for conducting funerals; and 

402 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

then again because, with his sanction, a converted Jew placed the 
Cross and an image of the Virgin in a synagogue. Moreover, he 
and other Sardinian bishops have been known to travel without 
permission of their metropolitan; this must cease. Then follows 
a very severe letter to the proconsul of Dalmatia, saying, among 
other things: "We see not of what sort your satisfaction is either 
to God or men"; and again: "With regard to your seeking to be 
in favour with us, it is fitting that with your whole heart and soul, 
and with tears, as becomes you, you should satisfy your Redeemer 
for such things as these." I am ignorant as to what the wretch 
had done. 

Next comes a letter to CaUinicus, exarch of Italy, congratulating 
him on a victory over the Slavs, and telling him how to act towards 
the heretics of I stria, who erred as to the Three Chapters. He 
writes also on this subject to the bishop of Ravenna. Once, by way 
of exception, we find a letter to the bishop of Syracuse, in which 
Gregory defends himself instead of finding fault with others. The 
question at issue is a weighty one, namely whether "Alleluia" 
should be said at a certain point in the mass. Gregory's usage, he 
says, is not adopted from subservience to the Byzantines, as the 
bishop of Syracuse suggests, but is derived from St. James via 
the blessed Jerome. Those who thought he was being unduly 
subservient to Greek usage were therefore in error. (A similar 
question was one of the causes of the schism of the Old Believers 
in Russia.) 

There are a number of letters to barbarian sovereigns, male and 
female. Brunichild, queen of the Franks, wanted the pallium con- 
ferred on a certain French bishop, and Gregory was willing to 
grant her request ; but unfortunately the emissary she sent was a 
schismatic. To Agilulph king of the Lombards he writes con- 
gratulating him on having made peace. "For, if unhappily peace 
had not been made, what else could have ensued but, with sin 
and danger on ix>th sides, the shedding of the blood of miserable 
peasants whose lalxmr profits both?" At the same time he writes 
to Agilulph's wife, Queen Theodelinda, telling her to influence 
her husband to persist in good courses. 1 le writes again to Bruni- 
child to find fault with two things IA her kingdom: that laymen 
are promoted at once to be bishops, without a probationary time 
as ordinary priests; and that Jews are allowed to have Christian 
slaves. To Theodoric and Theodebert, kings of the Franks, he 

403 



WBSTBRN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

writes saying that, owing to the exemplary piety of the Franks, 
he would like to utter only pleasant things, but he cannot refrain 
from pointing out the prevalence of simony in their kingdom. 
He writes again about a wrong done to the Bishop of Turin. 
One letter to a barbarian sovereign is wholly complimentary; it is 
to Richard, king of the Visigoths, who had been an Arian, but 
became a Catholic in 587. For this the Pope rewards him by 
sending him "a small key from the most sacred body of the blessed 
apostle Peter to convey his blessing, containing iron from his chains, 
that what had bound his neck for martyrdom may loose yours 
from all sins." I hope His Majesty was pleased with this present. 

The Bishop of Antioch is instructed as to the heretical synod of 
Ephesus, and informed that "it has come to our ears that in the 
Churches of the East no one attains to a sacred order except by 
giving of bribes" a matter which the bishop is to rectify where- 
ever it is in his power to do so. The Bishop of Marseilles is 
reproached for breaking certain images which were being adored : 
it is true that adoration of images is wrong, but images, neverthe- 
less, are useful and should be treated with respect. Two bishops 
of Gaul are reproached because a lady who had become a nun 
was afterwards forced to marry. "If this be so, ... you shall 
have the office of hirelings, and not the merit of shepherds." 

The above are a few of the letters of a single year. It is no wonder 
that he found no time for contemplation, as he laments in one of 
the letters of this year (cxxi). 

Gregory was no friend to secular learning. To Desiderius 
Bishop of Vienne in France, he writes: 

"It came to our ears, what we cannot mention without shame, 
that thy Fraternity is [i.e. thou art] in the habit of expounding 
gUpunar to certain persons. This thing we took so much amiss, 
and so strongly disapproved it, that we changed what had been 
said before into groaning and sadness, since the praises of Christ 
cannot find room in one mouth with the praises of Jupiter .... In 
proportion as it is execrable for such a thing to be related of a 
priest, it ought to be ascertained by strict and veracious evidence 
whether or not it be so." 

This hostility to pagan learning survived in the Church for at 
least four centuries, till the time of Gerbert (Sylvester II). It was 
only from the eleventh century onward that the Church became 
friendly to learning. 

404 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

Gregory's attitude to the emperor is much more deferential than 
his attitude to barbarian kings. Writing to a correspondent in 
Constantinople he says: "What pleases the most pious emperor, 
whatever he commands to be done, is in his power. As he deter- 
mines, so let him provide. Only let him not cause us to be mixed 
up in the deposition [of an orthodox bishop]. Still, what he does, 
if it is canonical, we will follow. But, if it is not canonical, we will 
bear it, so far as we can without sin of our own." When the 
Emperor Maurice was dethroned by a mutiny, of which the leader 
was an obscure centurion named Phocas, this upstart acquired 
the throne, and proceeded to massacre the five sons of Maurice 
in their father's presence, after which he put to death the aged 
Emperor himself. Phocas was of course crowned by the patriarch 
of Constantinople, \vho had no alternative but death. What is 
more surprising is that Gregory, from the comparatively safe 
distance of Rome, wrote letters of fulsome adulation to the usurper 
and his wife. "There is this difference/' he writes, "between the 
kings of the nations and the emperors of the republic, that the 
kings of the nations are lords of slaves, but the emperors of the 
republic lords of freemen. . . . May Almighty God in every 
thought and deed keep the heart of your Piety [i.e. you] in the 
hand of His grace; and whatsoever things should be done justly, 
whatsoever things with clemency, may the Holy Spirit who dwells 
in your breast direct." And to the wife of Phocas, the Empress 
Leontia, he writes: "What tongue may suffice to speak, what mind 
to think, what great thanks we owe to Almighty God for the 
serenity of your empire, in that such hard burdens of long duration 
have been removed from our necks, and the gentle yoke of im- 
perial supremacy has returned." One might suppose Maurice to 
have been a monster; in fact, he was a good old man. Apologists 
excuse Gregory on the pica that he did not know what atrocities 
had been committed by Phocas ; but he certainly knew the custo- 
mary behaviour of Byzantine usurpers, and he did not wait to 
ascertain whether Phocas was an exception. 

The conversion of the heathen was an important part of the 
increasing influence of the Church. The Goths had been convened 
before the end of the fourth century by Ulphilas, or Ulfila un- 
fortunately to Arianism, which was also the creed of the Vandals. 
After the death of Theodoric, however, the Goths became gradually 
Catholic: the king of the Visigoths, as we have seen, adopted 

405 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the orthodox faith in the time of Gregory. The Franks were 
Catholic from the time of Clovis. The Irish were converted before 
the fall of the Western Empire by St. Patrick, a Somersetshire 
country gentleman 1 who lived among them from 432 till his death 
in 461. The Irish in turn did much to evangelize Scotland and 
the North of England. In this work the greatest missionary was 
St. Columba; another was St. Columban, who wrote long letters 
to Gregory on the date of Easter and other important questions. 
The conversion of England, apart from Northumbria, was Gre- 
gory's special care. Every one knows how, before he was Pope, he 
saw two fair-haired blue-eyed boys in the slave market in Rome, 
and on being told they were Angles replied, "No, angels/* When 
he became Pope he sent St. Augustine to Kent to convert the 
Angles. There are many letters in his correspondence to St. 
Augustine, to Edilbext, king of the Angeli, and to others, about 
the mission. Gregory decrees that heathen temples in England are 
not to be destroyed, but the idols are to be destroyed and the 
temples then consecrated as churches. St. Augustine puts a 
number of queries to the Pope, such as whether cousins may 
marry, whether spouses who have had intercourse the previous 
night may come to church (yes, if they have washed, says Gregory), 
and so on. The mission, as we know, prospered, and that is why 
we are all Christians at this day. 

The period we have been considering is peculiar in the fact that, 
though its great men are inferior to those of many other epochs, 
their influence on future ages has been greater. Roman law, 
monasticism, and the papacy owe their long and profound in- 
fluence very largely to Justinian, Benedict, and Gregory. The 
men of the sixth century, though less civilized than their pre- 
decessors, were much more civilized than the men of the next 
four centuries, and they succeeded in framing institutions that 
ultimately tamed the barbarians. It is noteworthy that, of the 
above three men, two were aristocratic natives of Rome, and the 
third was Roman Emperor. Gregory is in a very real sense the 
last of the Romans. His tone of command, while justified by his 
office, has its instinctive basis in Roman aristocratic pride. After 
him, for many ages, the city of Rome ceased to produce great 
men. But in its downfall it succeeded in fettering the souls of its 
conquerors: the reverence which they felt for the Chair of Peter 
1 So at least Bury says in hit Life of the Stint. 
406 



ST. BENEDICT AND GREGORY THE GREAT 

was an outcome of the awe which they felt for the throne of the 
Caesars. 

In the East, the course of history was different. Mohammed 
was born when Gregory was about thirty years old. 



407 



Part 2. The Schoolmen 

Chapter VII 
THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

DURING the four centuries from Gregory the Great to Syl- 
vester II, the papacy underwent astonishing vicissitudes. Ii 
was subject, at times, to the Greek Emperor, at other times 
to the Western Emperor, and at yet other times to the local Roman 
aristocracy; nevertheless, vigorous popes in the eighth and ninth 
centuries, seizing propitious moments, built up the tradition of 
papal power. The period from A.D. 600 to 1000 is of vital impor- 
tance for the understanding of the medieval Church and its relation 
to the State. 

The popes achieved independence of the Greek emperors, not 
so much by their own efforts, as by the arms of the Lombards, to 
whom, however, they felt no gratitude whatever. The Greek Church 
remained always, in a great measure, subservient to the Emperor, 
who considered himself competent to decide on matters of faith, 
as well as to appoint and depose bishops, even patriarchs. The 
monks strove for independence of the Emperor, and for that reason 
sided, at times, with the Pope. But the patriarchs of Constantinople, 
though willing to submit to the Emperor, refused to regard them- 
selves as in any degree subject to papal authority. At times, when 
the Emperor needed the Pope's help against barbarians in Italy, 
he was more friendly to the Pope than the patriarch of Constanti- 
nople was. The main cause of the ultimate separation of the 
Eastern and the Western Churches was the refusal of the former 
to submit to papal jurisdiction. 

After the defeat of the Byzantines by the Lombards, the popes 
had reason to fear that they also would be conquered by these 
vigorous barbarians. They saved themselves by an alliance with 
the Franks, who, under Charlemagne, conquered Italy and Ger- 
many. This alliance produced the Holy Roman Empire, which 
had a constitution that assumed harmony between Pope and 
Emperor. The power of the Carolingian dynasty, however, decayed 

408 



THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

rapidly. At first, the Pope reaped the advantage of this decay, and 
in the latter half of the ninth century Nicholas I raised the papal 
power to hitherto unexampled heights. The general anarchy, how- 
ever, led to the practical independence of the Roman aristocracy, 
which, in the tenth century, controlled the papacy, with disastrous 
results. The way in which, by a great movement of reform, the 
papacy, and the Church generally, was saved from subordination 
to the feudal aristocracy, will be the subject of a later chapter. 

In the seventh century, Rome was still subject to the military 
power of the emperors, and popes had to obey or suffer. Some, e.g. 
Honorius, obeyed, even to the point of heresy; others, e.g. Martin 
I, resisted, and were imprisoned by the Emperor. From 685 to 
752, most of the popes were Syrians or Greeks. Gradually, how- 
ever, as the Lombards acquired more and more of Italy, Byzantine 
power declined. The Emperor Leo the Isaurian, in 726, issued his 
iconoclast decree, which was regarded as heretical, not only 
throughout the West, but by a large party in the East. This the 
popes resisted vigorously and successfully; at last, in 787, under 
the Empress Irene (at first as regent), the East abandoned the 
iconoclast heresy. Meanwhile, however, events in the West had 
put an end forever to the control of Byzantium over the papacy. 

In about the year 751, the Lombards captured Ravenna, the 
capital of Byzantine Italy. This event, while it exposed the popes 
to great danger from the Lombards, freed them from all depen- 
dence on the Greek emperors. The popes had preferred the Greeks 
to the Lombards for several reasons. First, the authority of the 
emperors was legitimate, whereas barbarian kings, unless recog- 
nized by the emperors, were regarded as usurpers. Second, the 
Greeks were civilized. Third, the Lombards were nationalists, 
whereas the Church retained Roman internationalism. Fourth, the 
Lombards had been Arians, and some odium still clung to them 
after their conversion. 

The Lombards, under King Liutprand, attempted to conquer 
Rome in 739, and were hotly opposed by Pope Gregory III, who 
turned to the Franks for aid The Merovingian kings, the descen- 
dants of Clovis, had lost all real power in the Prankish kingdom, 
which was governed by the "Mayors of the Palace." At this time 
the Mayor of the Palace was an exceptionally vigorous and able 
man, Charles Mattel, like William the Conqueror a bastard. In 
732 he had won the decisive battle of Tours against the Moors 

409 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

thereby saving Fiance for Christendom. This should have won 
him the gratitude of the Church, but financial necessity led him 
to seize some Church lands, which much diminished ecclesiastical 
appreciation of his merits. However, he and Gregory III both died 
in 741, and his successor Pepin was wholly satisfactory to the 
Church. Pope Stephen III, in 754, to escape the Lombards 
crossed the Alps and visited Pepin, when a bargain was struck 
which proved highly advantageous to both parties. The Pope 
needed military protection, but Pepin needed something that only 
the Pope could bestow: the legitimization of his title as king in 
place of the last of the Merovingians. In return for this, Pepin 
bestowed on the Pope Ravenna and all the territory of the former 
Exarchate in Italy. Since it could not be expected that Constanti- 
nople would recognize such a gift, this involved* political severance 
from the Eastern Empire. 

If the popes had remained subject to the Greek emperors, the 
development of the Catholic Church would have been very 
different. In the Eastern Church, the patriarch of Constantinople 
never acquired either that independence of secular authority or 
that superiority to other ecclesiastics that was achieved by the 
Pope. Originally all bishops were considered equal, and to a 
considerable extent this view persisted in the East. Moreover, 
there were other Eastern patriarchs, at Alexandria, Antioch, and 
Jerusalem, whereas the Pope was the only patriarch in the West. 
(This fact, however, lost its importance after the Mohammedan 
conquest.) In the West, but not in the East, the laity were mostly 
illiterate for many centuries, and this gave the Church an advantage 
in the West which it did not possess in the East. The prestige of 
Rome surpassed that of any Eastern city, for it combined the 
imperial tradition with legends of the martyrdom of Peter and 
Paul, and of Peter as first Pope. The Emperor's prestige might 
have sufficed to cope with that of the Pope, but no Western 
monarch's could. The Holy Roman emperors were often destitute 
of real power; moreover they only became emperors when the 
Pope crowned them. For all these reasons, the emancipation of 
the Pope from Byzantine domination was essential both to the 
independence of the Chuith in relation to secular monarchs, and 
to the ultimate establishment of the papal monarchy in the 
government of the Western Church. 

Certain documents of great importance, the 4< Donation of 



THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

Constantine" and the False Decretals, belong to this period. The 
False Decretals need not concern us, but something must be 
said of the Donation of Constantine. In order to give an air of 
antique legality to Pepin's gift, churchmen forged a document, 
purporting to be a decree issued by the Emperor Constantine, 
by which, when he founded the New Rome, he bestowed upon 
the Pope the old Rome and all its Western territories. This bequest, 
which was the basis of the Pope's temporal power, was accepted 
as genuine by the whole of the subsequent Middle Ages. It was 
first rejected as a forgery, in the time of the Renaissance, by 
Lorenzo Valla in 1439. He had written a book "on the elegancies 
of the Latin language," which, naturally, were absent in a pro- 
duction of the eighth century. Oddly enough, after he had pub- 
lished his book against the Donation of Constantine, as well as a 
treatise in praise of Epicurus, he was made apostolic secretary by 
Pope Nicholas V, who cared more for latinity than for the Church. 
Nicholas V did not, however, propose to give up the States of the 
Church, though the Pope's title to them had been based upon the 
supposed Donation. 

The contents of this remarkable document are summarized by 
C. Delislc Burns as follows: 1 

After a summary of the Nicene creed, the fall of Adam, and the 
birth of Christ, Constantine says he was suffering from leprosy, 
that doctors were useless, and that he therefore approached "the 
priests of the Capitol." They proposed that he should slaughter 
several infants and be washed in their blood, but owing to their 
mothers' tears he restored them. That night Peter and Paul 
appeared to him and said that Pope Sylvester was hiding in a cave 
on Soracte, and would cure him. He went to Soracte, where the 
"universal Pope*' told him Peter and Paul were apostles, not gods, 
showed him portraits which he recognized from his vision, and 
admitted it before all his "satraps." Pope Sylvester thereupon 
assigned him a period of penance in a hair shirt ; then he baptized 
him, when he saw a hand from heaven touching him. He was 
cured of leprosy, and gave up worshipping idols. Then "with all 
his satraps, the Senate, his nobles and the whole Roman people 
he thought it good to grant supreme power to the See of Peter/' 
and superiority over Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Con- 
stantinople. He then built a church in his palace of the Lateran. 
On the Pope he conferred his crown, tiara, and imperial garments. 
1 I am quoting t still unpublished book, Th* Firti Europe. 

4" 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

He placed a tiara on the Pope's head and held the reins of his 
horse. He left to "Silvester and his successors Rome and all the 
provinces, districts and cities of Italy and the West to be subject 
to the Roman Church forever"; he then moved East "because, 
where the princedom of bishops and the head of the Christian 
religion has been established by the heavenly Emperor it is not 
just that an earthly Emperor should have power." 

The Lombards did not tamely submit to Pepin and the Pope, 
but in repeated wars with the Franks they were worsted. At last, 
in 774, Pepin's son Charlemagne marched into Italy, completely 
defeated the Lombards, had himself recognized as their king, 
and then occupied Rome, where he confirmed Pepin's donation. 
The Popes of his day, Hadrian and Leo HI, found it to their 
advantage to further his schemes in every way. He conquered 
most of Germany, converted the Saxons by vigorous persecution, 
and finally, in his own person, revived the Western Empire, being 
crowned Emperor by the Pope in Rome on Christmas Day, 
A.D. 800. 

The foundation of the Holy Roman Empire marks an epoch in 
medieval theory, though much less in medieval practice. The 
Middle Ages were peculiarly addicted to legal fictions, and until 
this time the fiction had persisted that the Western provinces of 
the former Roman Empire were still subject, de jure, to the 
Emperor in Constantinople, who was regarded as the sole source 
of legal authority. Charlemagne, an adept in legal fictions, main- 
tained that the throne of the Empire was vacant, because the 
reigning Eastern sovereign Irene (who called herself emperor, not 
empress) was a usurper, since no woman could be emperor. 
Charles derived his claim to legitimacy from the Pope. There was 
thus, from the first, a curious interdependence of pope and 
emperor. No one could be emperor unless crowned by the Pope 
in Rome; on the other hand, for some centuries, every strong 
emperor claimed the right to appoint or depose popes. The 
medieval theory of legitimate power depended upon both emperor 
and pope; their mutual dependence was galling to both, but for 
centuries inescapable. There was constant friction, with advantage 
now to one side, now to the other. At last, in the thirteenth century, 
the conflict became irreconcilable. The Pope was victorious, but 
lost moral authority shortly afterwards. The Pope and the Holy 
Roman Emperor both survived, the Pope to the present day, the 



THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

Emperor to the time of Napoleon. But the elaborate medieval 
theory that had been built up concerning their respective powers 
ceased to be effective during the fifteenth century. The unity of 
Christendom, which it maintained, was destroyed by the power 
of the French, Spanish, and English monarchies in the secular 
sphere, and by the Reformation in the sphere of religion. 

The character of Charles the Great and his entourage is thus 
summed up by Dr. Gerhard Seeliger: 1 

Vigorous life was developed at Charles's court. We see there 
magnificence and genius, but immorality also. For Charles was 
not particular about the people he drew round him. He himself 
was no model, and he suffered the greatest licence in those whom 
he liked and found useful. As "Holy Emperor" he was addressed, 
though his life exhibited little holiness. He is so addressed by 
Alcuin, who also praises the Emperor's beautiful daughter Rotrud 
as distinguished for her virtues in spite of her having borne a son 
to Count Rodenc of Maine, though not his wife. Charles would not 
be separated from his daughters, he would not allow their 
marriage, and he was therefore obliged to accept the consequences. 
The other daughter, Bertha, also had two sons by the pious Abbot 
Angilbert of St. Riquier. In fact the court of Charles was a centre 
of very loose life. 

Charlemagne was a vigorous barbarian, politically in alliance 
with the Church, but not unduly burdened with personal piety 
He could not read or write, but he inaugurated a literary renais- 
sance. He was dissolute in his life, and unduly fond of his daughters, 
but he did all in his power to promote holy living among his 
subjects. He, like his father Pepin, made skilful use of the zeal of 
missionaries to promote his influence in Germany, but he saw to 
it that Popes obeyed his orders. They did this the more willingly, 
because Rome had become a barbarous city, in which the person 
of the Pope was not safe without external protection, and papal 
elections had degenerated into disorderly faction fights. In 799, 
local enemies seized the Pope, imprisoned him, and threatened to 
blind him. During Charles's lifetime, it seemed as if a new order 
would be inaugurated; but after his death little survived except 
a theory. 

The gains of the Church, and more particularly of the papacy, 
were wort solid than those of the Western Empire. England had 
1 In Cambridge Medieval History, II, 663. 

4*3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

been converted by a monastic mission under the orders of Gregory 
the Great, and remained much more subject to Rome than were 
the countries with bishops accustomed to local autonomy. The 
conversion of Germany was largely the work of St. Boniface 
(680-754), an English missionary, who was a friend of Charles 
Martel and Pepin, and completely faithful to the Pope. Boniface 
founded many monasteries in Germany ; his friend St. Gall founded 
the Swiss monastery which bears his name. According to some 
authorities, Boniface anointed Pepin as king with a ritual taken 
from the First Book of Kings. 

St. Boniface was a native of Devonshire, educated at Exeter and 
Winchester. He went to Frisia in 716, but soon had to return. In 
717 he went to Rome, and in 719 Pope Gregory II sent him to 
Germany to convert the Germans and to combat the influence of 
the Irish missionaries (who, it will be remembered, erred as to 
the date of Easter and the shape of the tonsure). After considerable 
successes, he returned to Rome in 722, where he was made bishop 
by Gregory II, to whom he took an oath of obedience. The Pope 
gave him a letter to Charles Martel, and charged him to suppress 
heresy in addition to converting the heathen. In 732 he became 
archbishop; in 738 he visited Rome a third time. In 741 Pope 
Zacharias made him legate, and charged him to reform the 
Prankish Church. He founded the abbey of Fulda, to which he 
gave a rule stricter than the Benedictine. Then he had a con- 
troversy with an Irish bishop of Salzburg, named Virgil, who 
maintained that there are other worlds than ours, but was, never- 
theless, canonized. In 754, after returning to Frisia, Boniface and 
his companions were massacred by the heathen. It was owing to 
him that German Christianity was papal, not Irish. 

English monasteries, particularly those of Yorkshire, were of 
great importance at this time. Such civilization as had existed in 
Roman Britain had disappeared, and the new civilization intro- 
duced by Christian missionaries centred entirely round the 
Benedictine abbeys, which owed everything directly to Rome. 
The Venerable Bede was a monk at Jarrow. His pupil Ecgbert, 
first archbishop of York, founded a cathedral school, where Alcuin 
was educated. 

Alcuin is an important figure in the culture of the time. He went 
to Rome in 780, and in the course of his journey met Charlemagne 
at Parma. The Emperor employed him to teach Latin to the Franks 

4*4 



THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

and to educate the royal family. He spent a considerable part of 
his life at the court of Charlemagne, engaged in teaching and in 
founding schools. At the end of his life he was abbot of St. Martin's 
at Tours. He wrote a number of books, including a verse history 
of the church at York. The emperor, though uneducated, had a 
considerable belief in the value of culture, and for a brief period 
diminished the darkness of the dark ages. But his work in this 
direction was ephemeral. The culture of Yorkshire was for a time 
destroyed by the Danes, that of France was damaged by the 
Normans. The Saracens raided Southern Italy, conquered Sicily, 
and in 846 even attacked Rome. On the whole, the tenth century 
was, in Western Christendom, about the darkest epoch; for the 
ninth is redeemed by the English ecclesiastics and by the as- 
tonishing figure of Johannes Scotus, as to whom I shall have 
more to say presently. 

The decay of Carolingian power after the death of Charlemagne 
and the division of his empire redounded, at first, to the advantage 
of the papacy. Pope Nicholas I (858-67) raised papal power to a 
far greater height than it had ever attained before. He quarrelled 
with the Emperors of the East and the West, with King Charles 
the Bald of France and King Lothar II of Lorraine, and with the 
episcopate of nearly every Christian country; but in almost all 
his quarrels he was successful. The clergy in many regions had 
become dependent on the local princes, and he set to work to 
remedy this state of affairs. His two greatest controversies con- 
cerned the divorce of Lothar II and the uncanonical deposition 
of Ignatius, patriarch of Constantinople. The power of the Church, 
throughout the Middle Ages, had a great deal to do with royal 
divorces. Kings were men of headstrong passions, who felt that 
the indissolubility of marriage was a doctrine for subjects only. 
The Church, however, could alone solemnize a marriage, and if 
the Church declared a marriage invalid, a disputed succession and 
a dynastic war were very likely to result. The Church, therefore, 
was in a very strong position in opposing royal divorces and 
irregular marriages. In England, it lost this position under Henry 
VIII, but recovered it under Edward VIII. 

When Lothar II demanded a divorce; the clergy of his kingdom 
agreed. Pope Nicholas, however, deposed the bishops who had 
acquiesced, and totally refused to admit the King's plea for divorce. 
Lothar's brother, the Emperor Louis II, thereupon inarched on 

415 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Rome with the intention of overawing the Pope; but superstitious 
terrors prevailed, and he retired. In the end, the Pope's will 
prevailed. 

The business of the Patriarch Ignatius was interesting, as 
showing that the Pope could still assert himself in the East. 
Ignatius, who was obnoxious to the Regent Bardas, was deposed, 
and Photius, hitherto a layman, was elevated to his place. The 
Byzantine government asked the Pope to sanction this proceeding. 
He sent two legates to inquire into the matter; when they arrived 
in Constantinople, they were terrorized, and gave their assent. 
For some time, the facts were concealed from the Pope, but when 
he came to know them, he took a high line. He summoned a council 
in Rome to consider the question ; he deposed one of the legates 
from his bishopric, and also the archbishop of Syracuse, who had 
consecrated Photius ; he anathematized Photius, deposed all whom 
he had ordained, and restored all who had been deposed for 
opposing him. The Emperor Michael III was furious, and wrote 
the Pope an angry letter, but the Pope replied: "The day of king- 
priests and emperor-pontiffs is past, Christianity has separated 
the two functions, and Christian emperors have need of the Pope 
in view of the life eternal, whereas popes have no need of emperors 
except as regards temporal things." Photius and the Emperor 
retorted by summoning a council, which excommunicated the 
Pope and declared the Roman Church heretical. Soon after this, 
however, Michael III was murdered, and his successor Basil 
restored Ignatius, explicitly recognizing papal jurisdiction in the 
matter. This triumph happened just after the death of Nicholas, 
and was attributable almost entirely to the accidents of palace 
revolutions. After the death of Ignatius, Photius again became 
patriarch, and the split between the Eastern and the Western 
Churches was widened. Thus it cannot be said that Nicholas's 
policy in this matter was victorious in the long run. 

Nicholas had almost more difficulty in imposing his will 
upon the episcopate than upon kings. Archbishops had come to 
consider themselves very great men, and they were reluctant to 
submit tamely to an ecclesiastical monarch. He maintained, how- 
ever, that bishops owe their existence to the Pope, and while he 
lived he succeeded, on the whole, in making this view prevail. 
There was, throughout these centuries, great doubt as to how 
bishops should be appointed. Originally they were elected by the 



THE PAPACY IN THB DARK AGES 

acclamation of the faithful in their cathedral city; then, frequently, 
by a synod of neighbouring bishops ; then, sometimes by the King, 
and sometimes by the Pope. Bishops could be deposed for grave 
causes, but it was not clear whether they should be tried by the 
Pope or by a provincial synod. All these uncertainties made the 
powers of an office dependent upon the energy and astuteness of 
its holders. Nicholas stretched papal power to the utmost limits 
of which it was then capable; under his successors, it sank again 
to a very low ebb. 

During the tenth century, the papacy was completely under the 
control of the local Roman aristocracy. There was, as yet, no fixed 
rule as to the election of Popes ; sometimes they owed their ele- 
vation to popular acclaim, sometimes to emperors or kings, and 
sometimes, as in the tenth century, to the holders of local urban 
power in Rome. Rome was, at this time, not a civilized city, as it 
had still been in the time of Gregory the Great. At times there 
were faction fights; at other times some rich family acquired 
control by a combination of violence and corruption. The disorder 
and weakness of Western Europe was so great at this period that 
Christendom might have seemed in danger of complete destruction. 
The Emperor and the King of France were powerless to curb the 
anarchy produced in their realms by feudal potentates who were 
nominally their vassals. The Hungarians made raids on Northern 
Italy. The Normans raided the French coast, until, in 911, they 
were given Normandy and in return became Christians. But the 
greatest danger in Italy and Southern France came from the 
Saracens, who could not be converted, and had no reverence for 
the Church. They completed the conquest of Sicily about the 
end of the ninth century; they were established on the River 
Garigliano, near Naples; they destroyed Monte Cassino and other 
great monasteries; they had a settlement on the coast of Provence, 
whence they raided Italy and the Alpine valleys, interrupting 
traffic between Rome and the North. 

The conquest of Italy by the Saracens was prevented by the 
Eastern Empire, which overcame the Saracens of the Garigliano 
in 9x5. But it was not strong enough to govern Rome, as it had 
done after Justinian's conquest, and the papacy became, for about 
a hundred years, a perquisite of the Roman aristocracy or of the 
counts of Tusculum. The most powerful Romans, at the beginning 
of the tenth century, were the "Senator" Theophylact and his 

Hillary of Wttto* 1'kOoiopk* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

daughter Marozia, in whose family the papacy nearly became 
hereditary. Marozia had several husbands in succession, and an 
unknown number of lovers. One of the latter she elevated to the 
papacy, under the title of Sergius II (904-11). His and her son 
was Pope John XI (931-36); her grandson was John XII 
(955-64), who became Pope at the age of sixteen and "completed 
the debasement of the papacy by his debauched life and the orgies 
of which the Lateran palace soon became the scene." 1 Marozia 
is presumably the basis for the legend of a female "Pope Joan." 

The popes of this period naturally lost whatever influence their 
predecessors had retained in the East. They lost also the power, 
which Nicholas I had successfully exercised, over bishops north 
of the Alps. Provincial councils asserted their complete inde- 
pendence of the Pope, but they failed to maintain independence 
of sovereigns and feudal lords. Bishops, more and more, became 
assimilated to lay feudal magnates. "The Church itself thus 
appears as the victim of the same anarchy in which lay society is 
weltering; all evil appetites range unchecked, and, more than ever, 
such of the clergy as still retain some concern for religion and 
for the salvation of the souls committed to their charge mourn 
over the universal decadence and direct the eyes of the faithful 
towards the spectre of the end of the world and of the I-ast 
Judgment." 2 

It is a mistake, however, to suppose that a special dread of the 
end of the world in the year 1000 prevailed at this time, as used 
to be thought. Christians, from St. Paul onward, believed the 
end of the world to be at hand, but they went on with their 
ordinary business none the less. 

The year 1000 may be conveniently taken as marking the end 
of the lowest depth to which the civilization of Western Europe 
sank. From this point the upward movement began which con- 
tinued till 1914. In the beginning, progress was mainly due to 
monastic reform. Outside the monastic orders, the clergy had 
become, for the most part, violent, immoral, and worldly; they 
were corrupted by the wealth and power that they owed to the 
benefactions of the pious. The same thing happened, over and 
over again, even to the monastic orders; but reformers, with new 
zeal, revived their moral force as often as it had decayed. 
Another reason which makes the year 1000 a turning-point is 
1 Cambridge Medieval History, HI, 455. ' Ibid 

418 



THE PAPACY IN THE DARK AGES 

the cessation, at about this time, of conquest by both Moham- 
medans and northern barbarians, so far at least as Western Europe 
is concerned. Goths, Lombards, Hungarians, and Normans came 
in successive waves; each horde in turn was christianized, but 
each in turn weakened the civilized tradition. The Western Empire 
broke up into many barbarian kingdoms ; the kings lost authority 
over their vassals; there was universal anarchy, with perpetual 
violence both on a large and on a small scale. At last all the races 
of vigorous northern conquerors had been converted to Chris- 
tianity, and had acquired settled habitations. The Normans, who 
were the last comers, proved peculiarly capable of civilization. 
They reconquered Sicily from the Saracens, and made Italy safe 
from the Mohammedans. They brought England back into the 
Roman world, from which the Danes had largely excluded it. 
Once settled in Normandy, they allowed France to revive, and 
helped materially in the process. 

Our use of the phrase "the Dark Ages" to cover the period from 
600 to 1000 marks our undue concentration on Western Europe. 
In China, this period includes the time of the Tang dynasty, the 
greatest age of Chinese poetry, and in many other ways a most 
remarkable epoch. From India to Spain, the brilliant civilization 
of Islam flourished. What was lost to Christendom at this time 
was not lost to civilization, but quite the contrary. No one could 
have guessed that Western Europe would later become dominant, 
both in power and in culture. To us, it seems that West-European 
civilization is civilization, but this is a narrow view. Most of the 
cultural content of our civilization comes to us from the Eastern 
Mediterranean, from Greeks and Jews. As for power: Western 
Europe was dominant from the Punic Wars to the fall of Rome 
say, roughly, during the six centuries from 200 B.C. to A.O. 400. 
After that time, no State in Western Europe could compare in 
power with China, Japan, or the Caliphate. 

Our superiority since the Renaissance is due partly to science 
and scientific technique, partly to political institutions slowly built 
up during the Middle Ages. There is no reason, in the nature of 
things, why this superiority should continue. In the present war, 
great military strength has been shown by Russia, China, and 
Japan. All these combine Western technique with Eastern ideology 
Byzantine, Confucian, or Shinto. India, if liberated, will con- 
tribute another Oriental element. It seems not unlikely that, 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

during the next few centuries, civilization, if it survives, will have 
greater diversity than it has had since the Renaissance. There is 
an imperialism of culture which is harder to overcome than the 
imperialism of power. Long after the Western Empire fell indeed 
until the Reformation all European culture retained a tincture 
of Roman imperialism. It now has, for us, a West-European 
imperialistic flavour. I think that, if we are to feel at home in the 
world after the present war, we shall have to admit Asia to equality 
in our thoughts, not only politically, but culturally. What changes 
this will bring about, I do not know, but I am convinced that they 
will be profound and of the greatest importance. 



420 



] 

J\ 



Chapter VIII 
JOHN THE SCOT 

JOHN THE SCOT, or Johannes Scotus, to which is sometimes 
added Eriugena or Erigena, 1 is the most astonishing person of 
the ninth century ; he would have been less surprising if he had 
lived in the fifth or the fifteenth century. He was an Irishman, a 
Neoplatonist, an accomplished Greek scholar, a Pelagian, a pan- 
theist. He spent much of his life under the patronage of Charles 
the Bald, king of France, and though he was certainly far from 
orthodox, yet, so far as we know, he escaped persecution. He set 
reason above faith, and cared nothing for the authority of eccle- 
siastics; yet his arbitrament was invoked to settle their controversies, 
To understand the occurrence of such a man, we must turn our 
attention first to Irish culture in the centuries following St. Patrick. 
Apart from the extremely painful fact that St. Patrick was an 
Englishman, there are two other scarcely less painful circum- 
stances: first, that there were Christians in Ireland before he went 
there; second, that, whatever he may have done for Irish Chris- 
tianity, it was not to him that Irish culture was due. At the time 
of the invasion of Gaul (says a Gaulish author), first by Attila, 
then by the Goths, Vandals, and Alaric, "all the learned men on 
their side the sea fled, and in the countries beyond sea, namely 
Ireland, and wherever else they betook themselves, brought to 
the inhabitants of those regions an enormous advance in learning." 2 
If any of these men sought refuge in England, the Angles and 
Saxons and Jutes must have mopped them up ; but those who went 
to Ireland succeeded, in combination with the missionaries, in 
transplanting a great deal of the knowledge and civilization that 
was disappearing from the Continent. There is good reason to 
believe that, throughout the sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries, 
a knowledge of Greek, as well as a considerable familiarity with 
Latin classics, survived among the Irish. 3 Greek was known in 

1 This addition it redundant; it would make his name "Iriah John 
from Ireland.* 1 In the ninth century "Scotuft" means "Irishman." 

1 Cambridge Medieval History*, III, 501. 

* This question is discussed carefully in the Cambridge Medieval 
History, III, chap, xix, and the conclusion is in favour of Irish knowledge 
of Greek. 

431 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

England from the time of Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury 
(669-90)9 who was himself a Greek, educated at Athens ; it may 
also have become known, in the North, through Irish missionaries. 
"During the latter part of the seventh century/' says Montague 
James, "it was in Ireland that the thirst for knowledge was keenest, 
and the work of teaching was most actively carried on. There the 
Latin language (and in a less degree the Greek) was studied from 
a scholar's point of view. ... It was when, impelled in the first 
instance by missionary zeal, and later by troubled conditions at 
home, they passed over in large numbers to the Continent, that 
they became instrumental in rescuing fragments of the literature 
which they had already learnt to value." 1 Heiric of Auxerre, 
about 876, describes this influx of Irish scholars: "Ireland, 
despising the dangers of the sea, is migrating almost en masse 
with her crowd of philosophers to our, shores, and all the most 
learned doom themselves to voluntary exile to attend the bidding 
of Solomon the wise" i.e. King Charles the Bald. 2 

The lives of learned men have at many times been perforce 
nomadic. At the beginning of Greek philosophy, many of the 
philosophers were refugees from the Persians; at the end of it, 
in the time of Justinian, they became refugees to the Persians. In 
the fifth century, as we have just seen, men of learning fled from 
Gaul to the Western Isles to escape the Germans; in the ninth 
century-, they fled back from England and Ireland to escape the 
Scandinavians. In our own day, German philosophers have to fly 
even further West to escape their compatriots. I wonder whether 
it will be equally long before a return flight takes place. 

Too little is known of the Irish in the days when they were 
preserving for Europe the tradition of classical culture. This 
learning was connected with monasteries, and was full of piety, 
as their penitentials show; but it does not seem to have been much 
concerned with theological niceties. Being monastic rather than 
episcopal, it had not the administrative outlook that characterized 
Continental ecclesiastics from Gregory the Great onwards. And 
being in the main cut off from effective contact with Rome, it still 
regarded the Pope as he was regarded in the time of St. Ambrose, 
not as he came to be regarded later. Peiagius, though probably a 
Briton, is thought by some to have been an Irishman. It is likely 
that his heresy survived in Ireland, where authority could not 

1 Lor. $., pp. 507-8. Loc. '!., p. 524. 

422 



JOHN THE SCOT 

stamp it out, as it did, with difficulty, in Gaul. These circumstances 
do something to account for the extraordinary freedom and fresh- 
ness of John the Scot's speculations. 

The beginning and the end of John the Scot's life are unknown ; 
we know only the middle period, during which he was employed 
by the king of France. He is supposed to have been born about 
800, and to have died about 877, but both dates are guesswork. 
He was in France during the papacy of Pope Nicholas I, and we 
meet again, in his life, the characters who appear in connection 
with that Pope, such as Charles the Bald and the Emperor Michael 
and the Pope himself. 

John was invited to France by Charles the Bald about the year 
843, and was by him placed at the head of the court school. A 
dispute as to predestination and free will had arisen between 
Gottschalk, a monk, and the important ecclesiastic Hincmar, Arch- 
bishop of Rheims. The monk was predestinarian, the archbishop 
libertarian. John supported the archbishop in a treatise On Divine 
Predestination, but his support went too far for prudence. The 
subject was a thorny one; Augustine had dealt with it in his 
writings against Pclagius, but it was dangerous to agree with 
Augustine and still more dangerous to disagree with him explicitly. 
John supported free will, and this might have passed uncensored ; 
but what roused indignation was the purely philosophic character 
of his argument. Not that he professed to controvert anything 
accepted in theology, but that he maintained the equal, or even 
superior, authority of a philosophy independent of revelation. He 
contended that reason and revelation are both sources of truth, 
and therefore cannot conflict; but if they ever seem to conflict, 
reason is to be preferred. True religion, he said, is true philosophy; 
but, conversely, true philosophy is true religion. His work was 
condemned by two councils, in 855 and 859; the first of these 
described it as "Scots porridge." 

He escaped punishment, however, owing to the support of the 
king, with whom he seems to have been on familiar terms. If 
William of Malmesbury is to be believed, the king, when John 
was dining with him, asked: "What separates a Scot from a sot?" 
and John replied, "Only the dinner table." The king died in 877, 
and after this date nothing is known as to John. Some think that 
he also died in that year. There are legends that he was invited to 
England by Alfred the Great, that he became abbot of Malmesbury 

423 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

or Athelncy, and was murdered by the monks. This misfortune, 
however, seems to have befallen some other John. 

John's next work was a translation from the Greek of the 
pseudo-Bionysius. This was a work which had great fame in the 
early Middle Ages. When St. Paul preached in Athens, "certain 
men clave unto him, and believed : among the which was Dionysius 
the Areopagite" (Acts xvii. 34). Nothing more is now known 
about this man, but in the Middle Ages a great deal more was 
known. He had travelled to France, and founded the abbey of 
St. Denis; so at least it was said by Hilduin, who was abbot just 
before John's arrival in France. Moreover, he was the reputed 
author of an important work reconciling Neoplatonism with 
Christianity. The date of this work is unknown ; it was certainly 
before 500 and after Plotinus. It was widely known and admired 
in the East, but in the West it was not generally known until the 
Greek Emperor Michael, in 827, sent a copy to Louis the Pious, 
who gave it to the above-mentioned Abbot Hilduin. He, believing 
it to have been written by St. Paul's disciple, the reputed founder 
of his abbey, would have liked to know what its contents were ; 
but nobody could translate the Greek until John appeared. He 
accomplished the translation, which he must have done with 
pleasure, as his own opinions were in close accord with those of 
the pseudo-Dionysius, who, from that time onward, had a great 
influence on Catholic philosophy in the West. 

John's translation was sent to Pope Nicholas in 860. The Pope 
was offended because his permission had not been sought before 
the work was published, and he ordered Charles to send John to 
Rome an order which was ignored. But as to the substance, and 
more especially the scholarship shown in the translation, he had 
no fault to find. His librarian Anastasius, an excellent Grecian, to 
whom he submitted it for an opinion, was astonished that a man 
from a remote and barbarous country could have possessed such 
a profound knowledge of Greek. 

John's greatest work was called (in Greek) On the Division o] 
Nature. This book was what, in scholastic times, would have been 
termed "realist"; that is to say, it maintained, with Plato, that 
universal* are anterior to particulars. He includes in "Nature" not 
only what is, but also what is not. The whole of Nature is divided 
into four classes: (i) what creates and is not created, (2) what 
creates and is created, (3) what is created but does not create, 

4*4 



JOHN THB SCOT 

(4) what neither creates nor is created. The first, obviously, is 
God. The second is the (Platonic) ideas, which subsist in God. 
The third is things in space and time. The fourth, surprisingly, is 
again God, not as Creator, but as the End and Purpose of all things. 
Everything that emanates from God strives to return to Him; 
thus the end of all such things is the same as their beginning. The 
bridge between the One and the many is the Logos. 

In the realm of not-being he includes various things, for example, 
physical objects, which do not belong to the intelligible world, 
and sin, since it means loss of the divine pattern. That which 
creates and is not created alone has essential subsistence ; it is the 
essence of all things. God is the beginning, middle, and end of 
things. God's essence is unknowable to men, and even to angels. 
Even to Himself He is, in a sense, unknowable: "God does not 
know himself, what He is, because He is not a what\ in a certain 
respect He is incomprehensible to Himself and to every intellect." 1 
In the being of things God's being can be seen; in their order, 
His wisdom; in their movement, His life. His being is the Father, 
His wisdom the Son, His life the Holy Ghost. But Dionysius is 
right in saying that no name can be ttuly asserted of God. There 
is an affirmative theology, in which He is said to be truth, goodness, 
essence, etc., but such affirmations are only symbolically true, for 
all such predicates have an opposite, but God has no opposite. 

The class of things that both create and are created embraces 
the whole of the prime causes, or prototypes, or Platonic ideas. 
The total ot these prime causes is die Logos. The world of ideas 
is eternal, and yet created. Under the influence of the Holy Ghost, 
these prime causes give rise to the world of particular things, the 
materiality of which U illusory. When it is said that God created 
things out of "nothing," this "nothing" is to be understood as 
God Himself, in the sense in which He transcends all knowledge. 

Creation is an eternal process: the substance of all finite things 
is God. The creature is not a being distinct from God. The 
creature subsists in God, and God manifests Himself in the 
creature in an ineffable manner. "The Holy Trinity loves Itself 
in us and in Itself ; a It sees and moves Itself." 

1 Cf. Bradley on the inadequacy of all cognition. He holds that no 
truth is quite true, but the Ix>st available truth is not intellectually 
corrigible. 

9 Cf. Spinox*. 

4*5 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Sin has its source in freedom: it arose because man turned 
towards himself instead of towards God. Evil does not have its 
ground in God, for in God there is no idea of evil. Evil is not- 
being and has no ground, for if it had a ground it would be 
necessary. Evil is a privation of good. 

The Logos is the principle that brings the many back to the 
One, and man back to God; it is thus the Saviour of the world. 
By union with God, the part of man that effects union becomes 
divine. 

John disagrees with the Aristotelians in refusing substantiality 
to particular things. He calls Plato the summit of philosophers. 
But the first three of his kinds of being are derived indirectly from 
Aristotle's moving-not-moved, moving-and- moved, moved-but- 
not-moving. The fourth kind of being in John's system, that which 
neither creates nor is created, is derived from the doctrine of 
Dionysius, that all things return into God. 

The unorthodoxy of John the Scot is evident from the above 
summary. His pantheism, which refuses substantial reality to 
creatures, is contrary to Christian doctrine. His interpretation of 
the creation out of "nothing* is not such as any prudent theologian 
could accept. His Trinity, which closely resembles that of Plotinus, 
fails to preserve the equality of the Three Persons, although he 
tries to safeguard himself on this point. His independence of mind 
is shown by these heresies, and is astonishing in the ninth century. 
His Neoplatonic outlook may perhaps have been common in 
Ireland, as it was among the Greek Fathers of the fourth and fifth 
centuries. It may be that, if we knew more about Irish Christianity 
from the fifth to the ninth century, we should find him less sur- 
prising. On the other hand, it may be that most of what is heretical 
in him is to be attributed to the influence of the pseu do- Dionysius, 
who, because of his supposed connection with St. Paul, was 
mistakenly believed to be orthodox. 

His view of creation as timeless is, of course, also heretical and 
compels him to say that the account in Genesis is allegorical. 
Paradise and the fall are not to be taken literally. Like all pantheists, 
he has difficulties about sin. He holds that man was originally 
without sin, and when hfe was without sin he was without dis- 
tinction of sex. This, of course, contradicts the statement "male 
and female created he them." According to John, it was only as 
the result of sin that human beings were divided into male and 



JOHN THB SCOT 

female. Woman embodies man's sensuous and fallen nature. In 
the end, distinction of sex will again disappear, and we shall have 
a purely spiritual body. 1 Sin consists in misdirected will, in falsely 
supposing something good which is not so. Its punishment is 
natural ; it consists in discovering the vanity of sinful desires. But 
punishment is not eternal. Like Origen, John holds that even the 
devils will be saved at last, though later than other people. 

John's translation of the pseudo-Dionysius had a great influence 
on medieval thought, but his magnum opus on the division of 
Nature had very little. It was repeatedly condemned as heretical, 
and at last, in 1225, Pope Honorius III ordered all copies of it 
to be burnt. Fortunately this order was not efficiently carried out. 

1 Contrast St. Augustine. 



4*7 



Chapter IX 

ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE 
ELEVENTH CENTURY 

FOR the first time since the fall of the Western Empire, Europe, 
during the eleventh century, made rapid progress not sub- 
sequently lost. There had been progress of a sort during the 
Carolingian renaissance, but it proved to be not solid. In the 
eleventh century, the improvement was lasting and many-sided. 
It began with monastic reform; it then extended to the papacy 
and Church government ; towards the end of the century it pro- 
duced the first scholastic philosophers. The Saracens were expelled 
from Sicily by the Normans; the Hungarians, having become 
Christians, ceased to be marauders ; the conquests of the Normans 
in France and England saved those countries from further Scandi- 
navian incursions. Architecture, which had been barbaric except 
where Byzantine influence prevailed, attained sudden sublimity. 
The level of education rose enormously among the clergy, and 
considerably in the lay aristocracy. 

The reform movement, in its earlier stages, was, in the minds of 
its promoters, actuated exclusively by moral motives. The clergy, 
both regular and secular, had fallen into bad ways, and earnest 
men set to work to make them live more in accordance with their 
principles. But behind this purely moral motive there was another, 
at first perhaps unconscious, but gradually becoming more and 
more open. This motive was to complete the separation between 
clergy and laity, and, in so doing, to increase the power of the 
former. It was therefore natural that the victory of reform in the 
Church should lead straight on to a violent conflict between 
Emperor and Pope. 

Priests had formed a separate and powerful caste in Egypt, 
Babylonia, and Persia, but not in Greece or Rome. In the primitive 
Christian Church, the distinction between clergy and laity arose 
gradually; when we read of "bishops" in the New Testament, the 
word does not mean what it has come to mean to us. The separa- 
tion of the clergy from the rest of the population had two aspects, 
one doctrinal, the other political; the political aspect depended 
upon the doctrinal. The clergy possessed certain miraculous 

4*8 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

powers, especially in connection with the sacraments except 
baptism, which could be performed by laymen. Without the help 
of the clergy, marriage, absolution, and extreme unction were 
impossible. Even more important, in the Middle Ages, was tran- 
substantiation: only a priest could perform the miracle of the 
mass. It was not until the eleventh century, in 1079, that the 
doctrine of transubstantiation became an article of faith, though 
it had been generally believed for a long time. 

Owing to their miraculous powers, priests could determine 
whether a man should spend eternity in heaven or in hell. If he 
died while excommunicate, he went to hell ; if he died after a priest 
had performed all the proper ceremonies, he would ultimately go 
to heaven provided he had duly repented and confessed. Before 
going to heaven, however, he would have to spend some time 
perhaps a very long time suffering the pains of purgatory. 
Priests could shorten this time by saying masses for his soul, 
which they were willing to do for a suitable money payment. 

All this, it must be understood, was genuinely and firmly be- 
lieved both by priests and by laity; it was not merely a creed 
officially professed. Over and over again, die miraculous powers 
of the clergy gave them the victory over powerful princes at the 
head of their armies. This power, however, was limited in two 
ways: by reckless outbreaks of passion on the part of furious lay- 
men, and by divisions among the clergy. The inhabitants of Rome, 
until the time of Gregory MI, showed little respect for the person 
of the Pope. They would kidnap him, imprison him, poison him, 
or fight against him, whenever their turbulent factional strife 
tempted them to such action. How is this compatible with their 
beliefs? Partly, no doubt, the explanation lies in mere lack of self- 
control; partly, however, in the thought that one could repent on 
one's deathbed. Another reason, which operated less in Rome than 
elsewhere, was that kings could bend to their will the bishops in 
their kingdoms, and thus secure enough priestly magic to save 
themselves from damnation. Church discipline and a unified 
ecclesiastical government were therefore essential to the power 
of the clergy. These ends were secured during the eleventh century, 
as part and parcel of a moral reformation of the clergy. 

The power of die clergy as a whole could only be secured by 
very considerable sacrifices on the part of individual ecclesiastics. 
The two great evils against which all clerical reformers directed 

4*9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

their energies were simony and concubinage. Something must be 
said about each of these. 

Owing to the benefactions of the pious, the Church had become 
rich. Many bishops had huge estates, and even parish priests had, 
as a rule, what for those times was a comfortable living. The 
appointment of bishops was usually, in practice, in the hands of 
the king, but sometimes in those of some subordinate feudal noble. 
It was customary for the king to sell bishoprics; this, in fact, 
provided a substantial pan of his income. The bishop, in turn, 
sold such ecclesiastical preferment as was in his power. There 
was no secret about this. Gerbert (Sylvester II) represented 
bishops as saying: "I gave gold and I received the episcopate; 
but yet I do not fear to receive it back if I behave as I should. I 
ordain a priest and I receive gold ; I make a deacon and I receive 
a heap of silver. Behold the gold which I gave I have once more 
unlessened in my purse. 1 ' 1 Peter Damian in Milan, in 1059, 
found that every cleric in the city, from the archbishop downwards, 
had been guilty of simony. And this state of affairs was in no way 
exceptional. 

Simony, of course, was a sin, but that was not the only objection 
to it. It caused ecclesiastical preferment to go by wealth, not merit ; 
it confirmed lay authority in the appointment of bishops, and 
episcopal subservience to secular rulers; and it tended to make the 
episcopate part of the feudal system. Moreover, when a man had 
purchased preferment, he was naturally anxious to recoup himself, 
so that worldly rather than spiritual concerns were likely to pre- 
occupy him. For these reasons, the campaign against simony was 
a necessary part of the ecclesiastical struggle for power. 

Very similar considerations applied to clerical celibacy. The 
reformers of the eleventh century often spoke of "concubinage'' 
when it would have been more accurate to speak of "marriage." 
Monks, of course, were precluded from marriage by their vow 
of chastity, but there had been no clear prohibition of marriage 
for the secular clergy. In the Eastern Church, to this day, parish 
priests are allowed to be married. In the West, in the eleventh 
century, most parish priests were married. Bishops, for their 
part, appealed to St. Paul's pronouncement: "A bishop then must 
be blameless, the husband of one wife." 1 There was not the same 

1 Cambridge Medieval History* V, chap. to. 
' I Timothy iii. 2. 

430 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

clear moral issue as in the matter of simony, but in the insistence 
on clerical celibacy there were political motives very similar to 
those in the campaign against simony. 1 

When priests were married, they naturally tried to pass on 
Church property to their sons. They could do this legally if their 
sons became priests ; therefore one of the first steps of the reform 
party, when it acquired power, was to forbid the ordination of 
priests' sons. 8 But in the confusion of the times there was still 
danger that, if priests had sons, they would find means of illegally 
alienating parts of the Church lands. In addition to this economic 
consideration, there was also the fact that, if a priest was a family 
man like his neighbours, he seemed to them less removed from 
themselves. There was, from at least the fifth century onwards, 
an intense admiration for celibacy, and if the clergy were to com- 
mand the reverence on which their power depended, it was highly 
advantageous that they should be obviously separated from other 
men by abstinence from marriage. The reformers themselves, no 
doubt, sincerely believed that the married state, though not 
actually sinful, is lower than the state of celibacy, and is only 
conceded to the weakness of the flesh. St. Paul says "If they 
cannot contain, let them marry" 3 ; but a really holy man ought to 
he able to "contain." Therefore clerical celibacy is essential to 
the moral authority of the Church. 

After these general preliminaries, let us come to the actual 
history of the reform movement in the eleventh-century Church. 

The beginning goes back to the foundation of the abbey of 
Cluny in 910 by William the Pious, Duke of Aquitaine. This 
abbey was, from the first, independent of all external authority 
except that of the Pope; moreover, its abbot was given authority 
over other monasteries that owed their origin to it. Most monas- 
teries, at this time, were rich and lax; Cluny, though avoiding 
extreme asceticism, was careful to preserve decency and decorum. 
The second abbot, Odo, went to Italy, and was given control of 
several Roman monasteries. He was not always successful: 
"Farfa, divided by a schism between two rival abbots who had 

murdered their* predecessor, resisted the introduction of Cluniac 



1 Sec Henry C. Lea, The History of Sacerdotal Celibacy. 
1 In 1046, it was decreed that a clerk'i on cannot be a bishop. Later, 
it was decreed he could not be in holy orders. 
9 I Corinthians vti. 9. 

43 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

monks by Odo and got rid by poison of the abbot whom Alberic 
installed by armed force." 1 (Alberic was the ruler of Rome who 
had invited Odo.) In the twelfth century Cluny's reforming zeal 
grew* cold. St. Bernard objected to its fine architecture; like all 
the most earnest men of his time, he considered splendid 
ecclesiastical edifices a sign of sinful pride. * 

During the eleventh century, various other orders were founded 
by reformers. Romuald,an ascetic hermit, founded the Camaldolese 
Order in 1012; Peter Damian, of whom we shall speak shortly, 
was a follower of his. The Carthusians, who never ceased to be 
austere, were founded by Bruno of Cologne in 1084. In 1098 the 
Cistercian Order was founded, and in 1113 it was joined by St. 
Bernard. It adhered strictly to the Benedictine Rule. It forbade 
stained-glass windows. For labour, it employed convent, or lay 
brethren. These men took the vows, but were forbidden to learn 
reading and writing; they were employed mainly in agriculture, 
but also in other work, such as architecture. Fountains Abbey, in 
Yorkshire, is Cistercian a remarkable work for men who thought 
all beauty of the Devil. 

As will be seen from the case of Farfa, which was by no means 
unique, monastic reformers required great courage and energy. 
Where they succeeded, they were supported by the secular 
authorities. It was these men and their followers who made 
possible the reformation, first of the papacy and then of the Church 
as a whole. 

The reform of the papacy, however, was, at first, mainly the 
work of the Emperor. The last dynastic Pope was Benedict IX, 
elected in 1032, and said to have been only twelve years old at 
the time. He was the son of Alberic of Tusculum, whom we hav% 
already met in connection with Abbot Odo. As he grew older, he 
grew more and more debauched, and shocked even the Romans. 
At last his wickedness reached such a pitch that he decided to 
resign the papacy in order to marry. He sold it to his godfather, 
who became Gregory VI. This man, though he acquired the papacy 
stmoniacally, was a reformer; he was a friend of Hildebrand 
(Gregory VII). The manner of his acquiring the papacy, however, 
was too scandalous to be passed over. The young Emperor 
Henry III (1039-56) was a pious reformer, who had abandoned 
simony at great cost to his revenue, while retaining the right to 
* Cambridge Medieval History, V, 66a. 

43* 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

appoint bishops. He came to Italy in 1046, at the age of twenty- 
two, and deposed Gregory VI on the charge of simony. 

Henry III retained throughout his reign the power of making 
and unmaking popes, which, however, he exercised wisely Ih the 
interests of reform. After getting rid of Gregory VI, he appointed 
a German bishop, Suidger of Bamberg; the Romans resigned the 
election rights which they had claimed and often exercised, almost 
always badly. The new Pope died next year, and the Emperor's 
next nominee also died almost immediately of poison, it was 
said. Henry III then chose a relation of his own, Bruno of Tout, 
who became Leo IX (1049-54). He was an earnest reformer, 
who travelled much and held many councils; he wished to fight 
the Normans in Southern Italy, but in this he was unsuccessful. 
Hildebrand was his friend, and might almost be called his pupil. 
At his death the Emperor appointed one more Pope, Gebhard of 
Eichstadt, who became Victor II, in 1055. But the Emperor died 
the next year, and the Pope the year after. From this point on- 
wards, the relations of Emperor and Pope became less friendly. 
The Pope, having acquired moral authority by the help of Henry 
III, claimed first independence of the Emperor, and then super- 
iority to him. Thus began the great conflict which lasted two 
hundred years and ended in the defeat of the Emperor. In the 
long run, therefore, Henry Ill's policy of reforming the papacy 
was perhaps short-sighted. 

The next Emperor, Henry IV, reigned for fifty years (1056- 
1106). At first he was a minor, and the regency 'was exercised by 
his mother the Empress Agnes. Stephen IX was Pope for one year, 
and at his death the cardinals chose one Pope while the Romans, 
reasserting the rights they had surrendered, chose another. The 
Empress sided with the cardinals, whose nominee took the name 
of Nicholas II. Although his reign only lasted three years, it was 
important. He made peace with the Normans, thereby making the 
papacy less dependent on the Emperor. In his time the manner 
in which popes were to be elected was determined by a decree, 
according to which the choice was to be made first by die cardinal 
bishops, then by the other cardinals, and last by the clergy and 
people of Rome, whose participation, one gathers, was to be 
purely formal. In effect, the cardinal bishops were to select the 
Pope. The election was to take place in Rome if possible, but 
might take place elsewhere if circumstances made election in 

433 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Rome difficult or undesirable. No part in the election was allotted 
to the Emperor. This decree, which was accepted only after a 
struggle, was an essential step in the emancipation of the papacy 
from lay control. 

Nicholas II secured a decree that, for the future, ordinations 
by men guilty of simony were not to be valid. The decree was 
not made retroactive, because to do so would have invalidated the 
great majority of ordinations of existing priests. 

During the pontificate of Nicholas II an interesting struggle 
began in Milan. The Archbishop, following the Ambrosian tradi- 
tion, claimed a certain independence of the Pope. He and his 
clergy were in alliance with the aristocracy, and were strongly 
opposed to reform. The mercantile and lower classes, on the other 
hand, wished the clergy to be pious; there were riots in support 
of clerical celibacy, and a powerful reform movement, called 
"Patarine," against the archbishop and his supporters. In 1059 
the Pope, in support of reform, sent to Milan as his legate the 
eminent St. Peter Damian. Damian was the author of a treatise 
On Divine Omnipotence, which maintained that God can do things 
contrary to the law of contradiction, and can undo the past. 
(This view was rejected by St. Thomas, arid has, since his time, 
been unorthodox.) He opposed dialectic, and spoke of philosophy 
as the handmaid of theology. He was, as we have seen, a follower 
of the hermit Romuald, and engaged with great reluctance in the 
conduct of affairs. His holiness, however, was such an asset to 
the papacy that very strong persuasion was brought to bear on 
him to help in the reform campaign, and he yielded to the Pope's 
representations. At Milan in 1050 he made a speech against simony 
to the assembled clerics. At first they were so enraged that his 
life was in danger, but at last his eloquence won them over, and 
with tears they one and all confessed themselves guilt}-. Moreover, 
they promised obedience to Rome. Under the next Pope, there 
was a dispute with the Emperor about the see of Milan, in which, 
with the help of the Patarines, the Pope was ultimately victorious. 

At the death of Nicholas II in 1961 , Henry IV being now of age, 
there was a dispute between him and the cardinals as to the suc- 
cession to the papacy. The* Emperor had not accepted the election 
decree, and was not prepared to forgo his rights in the election of 
the Pope. The dispute lasted for three years, but in the end the 
cardinals' choice prevailed, without a definite trial of strength 

434 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

between Emperor and curia. What turned the scale was the 
obvious merit of the cardinals' Pope, who was a man combining 
virtue with experience, and a former pupil of Lanfranc (afterwards 
Archbishop of Canterbury). The death of this Pope, Alexander II, 
in 1073, was followed by the election of Hildebrand (Gregory VII). 

Gregory VII (1073-85) is one of the most eminent of the 
Popes. He had long been prominent, and had great influence on 
papal policy. It was owing to him that Pope Alexander II blessed 
William the Conqueror's English enterprise; he favoured the 
Normans both in Italy and in the North. He had been a protg 
of Gregory VI, who bought the papacy in order to combat simony; 
after the deposition of this Pope, Hildebrand passed two years in 
exile. Most of the rest of his life was spent in Rome. He was not 
a learned man, but was inspired largely by St. Augustine, whose 
doctrines he learnt at second-hand from his hero Gregory the 
Great. After he became Pope, he believed himself the mouthpiece 
of St. Peter. This gave him a degree of self-confidence which, 
on a mundane calculation, was not justified. He admitted that 
the Emperor's authority was also of divine origin: at first, he 
compared Pope and Emperor to two eyes; later, when quarrelling 
with the Emperor, to the sun and moon the Pope, of course, 
being the sun. The Pope must be supreme in morals, and must 
therefore have the right to depose the Emperor if the Emperor 
was immoral. And nothing could be more immoral than resisting 
the Pope. All this he genuinely and profoundly believed. 

Gregory VII did more than any previous Pope to enforce 
clerical celibacy. In Germany the clergy objected, and on this 
ground as well as others were inclined to side with the Emperor. 
The laity, however, everywhere preferred their priests celibate. 
Gregory stirred up riots of the laity against married priests and 
their wives, in which both often suffered brutal ill-treatment. He 
called on the laity not to attend mass when celebrated by a recal- 
citrant priest. He decreed that the sacraments of married clergy 
were invalid, and that such clergy must not enter churches. All 
this roused clerical opposition and lay support; even in Rome, 
where Popes had usually gone in danger of their lives, he was 
popular with the people. 

In Gregory's time began the great dispute concerning "inves- 
titures." When a bishop was consecrated, he was invested with a 
ring and staff as symbols of his office. These had been given by 

435 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Emperor or king (according to the locality), as the bishop's feudal 
overlord. Gregory insisted that they should be given by the Pope. 
The dispute was part of the work of detaching the ecclesiastical 
from the feudal hierarchy. It lasted a long time, but in the end 
the papacy was completely victorious. 

The quarrel which led to Canossa began over the archbishopric 
of Milan. In 1075 the Emperor, with the concurrence of the 
suffragans, appointed an archbishop; the Pope considered this 
an infringement of his prerogative, and threatened the Emperor 
with excommunication and deposition. The Emperor retaliated 
by summoning a council of bishops at Worms, where the bishops 
renounced their allegiance to the Pope. They wrote him a letter 
accusing him of adultery and perjury, and (worse than cither) 
ill-treatment of bishops. The Emperor also wrote him a letter, 
claiming to be above all earthly judgment. The Emperor and his 
bishops pronounced Gregory deposed ; Gregory excommunicated 
the Emperor and his bishops, and pronounced t/iem deposed. 
Thus the stage was set. 

In the first act, victory went to the Pope. The Saxons, who had 
before rebelled against Henry IV and then made peace with him, 
rebelled again ; the German bishops made their peace with Gre- 
gory. The world at large was shocked by the Emperor's treatment 
of the Pope. Accordingly in the following year (1077) Henry 
decided to seek absolution from the Pope. In the depth of winter, 
with his wife and infant son and a few attendants, he crossed the 
Mont Cenis pass, and presented himself as a suppliant before the 
castle of Canossa, where the Pope was. For three days the Pope 
kept him waiting, bare-foot and in penitential garb. At last he was 
admitted. Having expressed penitence and sworn, in future, to 
follow the Pope's directions in dealing with his German opponents, 
be was pardoned and received back into communion. 

The Pope's victory, however, was illusory. 1 le had been caught 
out by the rules of his own theology, one of which enjoined abso- 
lution for penitents. Strange to say, he was taken in by Henry, 
and supposed his repentance sincere. He soon discovered his 
mistake. He could no longer support Henry's German enemies, 
who felt that he had betrayed them. From this moment, tilings 
began to go against him. 

Henry's German enemies elected a rival Emperor, named 
Rudolf. The Pope, at first, while maintaining that it was for him 

436 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

to decide between Henry and Rudolf, refused to come to a decision. 
At last, in 1080, having experienced the insincerity of Henry's 
repentance, he pronounced for Rudolf. By this time, however, 
Henry had got the better of most of his opponents in Germany. 
He had an antipope elected by his clerical supporters, and with 
him, in 1084, he entered Rome. His antipope duly crowned him, 
but both had to retreat quickly before the Normans, who advanced 
to the relief of Gregory. The Normans brutally sacked Rome, and 
took Gregory away with them. He remained virtually their 
prisoner until his death the next year. 

Thus his policies appeared to have ended in disaster. But in 
fact they were pursued, with more moderation, by his successors. 
A compromise favourable to the papacy was patched up for the 
moment, but the conflict was essentially irreconcilable. Its later 
stages will be dealt with in subsequent chapters. 

It remains to say something of the intellectual re\ival in the 
eleventh century. The tenth century was destitute of philosophers, 
except for Gerbert (Pope Sylvester II, 999-1003), and even he 
was more a mathematician than a philosopher. But as the eleventh 
century advanced, men of real philosophical eminence began to 
appear. Of these, the most important were Anselm and Roscelin, 
but some others deserve mention. All were monks connected 
with the reform movement. 

Peter Damian, the oldest of them, has already been mentioned. 
Bcrengar of Tours (d. 1088) is interesting as being something of 
a rationalist. He maintained that reason is superior to authority, 
in support of which view he appealed to John the Scot, who was 
therefore posthumously condemned. Berengar denied transub- 
sta filiation, and was twice compelled to recant. His heresies were 
combated by Lanfranc in his book DC corpore ct sanguine Domini. 
Lanfranc was born at Pavia, studied law at Bologna, and became 
a first-rate dialectician. But he abandoned dialectic for theology, 
and entered the monastery of Bcc, in Normandy, where he con- 
ducted a school. William the Conqueror made him Archbishop 
of Canterbury in 1070. 

St. Anselm was, like Lanfranc, an Italian, a monk at Bee, and 
.Vrchbiahop of Canterbury (1093-1109), in which capacity he 
followed the principles of Gregory VII and quarrelled with the 
king. He is chiefly known to fame as the inventor of the "onto- 
logicaJ argument' 1 for the existence of God. As he put it, the 

437 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

argument is as follows: We define "God" as the greatest possible 
object of thought. Now if an object of thought does not exist, 
another, exactly like it, which does exist, is greater. Therefore the 
greatest of all objects of thought must exist, since, otherwise, 
another, still greater, would be possible. Therefore God exists. 

This argument has never been accepted by theologians. It was 
adversely criticized at the time; then it was forgotten till the latter 
half of the thirteenth century. Thomas Aquinas rejected it, and 
among theologians his authority has prevailed ever since. But 
among philosophers it has had a better fate. Descartes revived 
it in a somewhat amended form ; Leibniz thought that it could be 
made valid by the addition of a supplement to prove that God is 
possible. Kant considered that he had demolished it once for all. 
Nevertheless, in some sense, it underlies the system of Hegel and 
his followers, and reappears in Bradley 's principle: "What may 
be and must be, is." 

Clearly an argument with such a distinguished history is to be 
treated with respect, whether valid or not. The real question is: 
Is there anything we can think of which, by the mere fact that 
we can think of it, is shown to exist outside our thought ? Every 
philosopher would like to say yes, because a philosopher's job 
is to find out things about the world by thinking rather than 
observing. If yes is the right answer, there is a bridge from pure 
thought to things; if not, not. In this generalized form, Plato uses 
a kind of ontological argument to prove the objective reality of 
ideas. But no one before Anselm had stated the argument in its 
naked logical purity. In gaining purity, it loses plausibility; but 
this also is to Anselm's credit. 

For the rest, Anselm's philosophy is mainly derived from St. 
Augustine, from whom it acquires many Platonic elements. He 
believes in Platonic ideas, from which he derives another proof 
of the existence of God. By Neoplatonic arguments he professes 
to prove not only God, but the Trinity. (It will be remembered 
that Plotinus has a Trinity, though not one that a Christian can 
accept as orthodox.) Anselm considers reason subordinate to faith. 
"I believe in order to understand," he says; following Augustine, 
he holds that without belief it is impossible to understand. God, 
he says, is not just, but justice. It will be remembered that John 
the Scot says similar things. The common origin is in Plato. 

St Anaelm, like his predecessors in Christian philosophy, is in 

438 



ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM IN THE ELEVENTH CENTURY 

the Platonic rather than the Aristotelian tradition. For this reason, 
he has not the distinctive characteristics of the philosophy which 
is called "scholastic," which culminated in Thomas Aquinas. 
This kind of philosophy may be reckoned as beginning with 
Roscelin, who was Anselm's contemporary, being seventeen years 
younger than Anselm. Roscelin marks a new beginning, and will 
be considered in a later chapter. 

When it is said that medieval philosophy, until the thirteenth 
century, was mainly Platonic, it must be remembered that Plato, 
except for a fragment of the Timaeus, was known only at second 
or third hand. John the Scot, for example, could not have held 
the views which he did hold but for Plato, but most of what is 
Platonic in him comes from the pseudo-Dionysius. The date of 
this author is uncertain, but it seems probable that he was a 
disciple of Proclus the Neoplatonist. It is probable, also, that 
John the Scot had never heard of Proclus or read a line of Plotinus. 
Apart from the pseudo-Dionysius, the other source of Platonism 
in the Middle Ages was Boethius. This Platonism was in many 
ways different from that which a modern student derives from 
Plato's own writings. It omitted almost everything that had no 
obvious bearing on religion, and in religious philosophy it enlarged 
and emphasized certain aspects at the expense of others. This 
change in the conception of Plato had already been effected by 
Plotinus. The knowledge of Aristotle was also fragmentary, but 
in an opposite direction: all that was known of him until the 
twelfth century was Hoethius's translation of the Categories and 
/)c Emendation?. Thus Aristotle was conceived as a mere dialec- 
tician, and Plato as only a religious philosopher and the author 
of the theory of ideas During the course of the later Middle Ages, 
both these partial conceptions were gradually emended, especially 
the conception of Aristotle. But the process, as regards Plato, 
was not completed until the Renaissance. 



439 




Chapter X 
MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

attacks upon the Eastern Empire, Africa, and Spain, 
differed from those of Northern barbarians on the West in 
two respects: first, the Eastern Empire survived till 1453, 
nearly a thousand years longer than the Western ; second, the main 
attacks upon the Eastern Empire were made by Mohammedans, 
who did not become Christians after conquest, but developed an 
important civilization of their own. 

The Hegira, 1 with which the Mohammedan era begins, took 
place in A.D. 622; Mohammed died ten years later. Immediately 
after his death the Arab conquests began, and they proceeded with 
extraordinary rapidity. In the East, Syria was invaded in 634, 
and completely subdued within two years. In 637 Persia was 
invaded; in 650 its conquest was completed. India was invaded 
in 664; Constantinople was besieged in 669 (and again in 716-17). 
The westward movement was not quite so sudden. Egypt was 
conquered by 642, Carthage not till 697. Spain, except for a small 
corner in the north-west, was acquired in 711-12. Westward 
expansion (except in Sicily and Southern Italy) was brought to a 
standstill by the defeat of the Mohammedans at the battle of 
'Fours in 732, just one hundred years after the death of the 
Prophet. (The Ottoman Turks, who finally conquered Con- 
stantinople, belong to a later period than that with which we are 
now concerned.) 

Various circumstances facilitated this expansion. Persia and the 
Eastern Empire were exhausted by their long wars. The Syrians, 
who were largely Nestorian, suffered persecution at the hands of 
the Catholics, whereas Mohammedans tolerated all sects of 
Christians in return for the payment of tribute. Similarly in 
Egypt the Monophysites, who were the hulk of the population, 
welcomed the invaders. In Africa, the Arabs allied themselves 
with the Berbers, whom the Romans had never thoroughly sub- 
dued. Arabs and Berbery together invaded Spain, where they 
were helped by the Jews, whom the Visigoths had severely 
persecuted. 

1 The Hegira wan Mohammed'* Hight from Mecca to Medina. 

440 



MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

The religion of the Prophet was a simple monotheism, uncom- 
plicated by the elaborate theology of the Trinity and the Incarna- 
tion. The Prophet made no claim to be divine, nor did his followers 
make such a claim on his behalf. He revived the Jewish prohibition 
of graven images, and forbade the use of wine. It was the duty of 
the faithful to conquer as much of the world as possible for Islam, 
but there was to be no persecution of Christians, Jews, or Zoro- 
astrians the "people of the Book," as the Koran calls them, i.e. 
those who followed the teaching of a Scripture. 

Arabia was largely desert, and was growing less and less capable 
of supporting its population. The first conquests of the Arabs 
began as mere raids for plunder, and only turned into permanent 
occupation after experience had shown the weakness of the enemy. 
Suddenly, in the course of some twenty years, men accustomed to 
all the hardships of a meagre existence on the fringe of the desert 
found themselves masters of some of the richest regions of the 
world, able to enjoy every luxury and to acquire all the refinements 
of an ancient civilization. They withstood the temptations of this 
transformation better than most of the Northern barbarians had 
done. As they had acquired their empire without much severe 
fighting, there had been little destruction, and the civil adminis- 
tration was kept on almost unchanged. Both in Persia and in the 
Byzantine Kmpirc, the civil government had been highly organized. 
The Arab tribesmen, at first, understood nothing of its compli- 
cations, and perforce accepted the services of the trained men 
whom they found in charge. These men, for the most part, showed 
no reluctance to serve under their new masters. Indeed, the change 
made their work easier, since taxation was lightened very con- 
siderably. The populations, moreover, in order to escape the 
tribute, very largely abandoned Christianity for Islam. 

The Arab Empire was an absolute monarchy, under the caliph, 
who was the successor of the Prophet, and inherited much of his 
holiness. The caliphate was nominally elective, but soon became 
hereditary, The first dynasty, that of the Umayyads, who lasted 
till 750, was founded by men whose acceptance of Mohammed 
was purely political, and it remained always opposed to the more 
fanatical among the faithful. The Arabs; although they conquered 
a great part of the world in the name of a new religion, were not 
a very religious race; the motive of their conquests was plunder 
and wealth rather than religion. It was only in virtue of their lack 

44' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of fanaticism that a handful of warriors were able to govern, 
without much difficulty, vast populations of higher civilization 
and alien religion. 

The Persians, on the contrary, have been, from the earliest times, 
deeply religious and highly speculative. After their conversion, 
they made out of Islam something much more interesting, more 
religious, and more philosophical, than had been imagined by the 
Prophet and his kinsmen. Ever since the death of Mohammed's 
son-in-law All in 661, Mohammedans have been divided into two 
sects, the Sunni and the Shiah. The former is the larger; the latter 
follows Ali, and considers the Umayyad dynasty to have been 
usurpers. The Persians have lonj; belonged to the Shiah sect. 
Largely by Persian influence, the Umayyads were at last over- 
thrown, and succeeded by the Abbasids, who represented Persian 
interests. The change was marked by the removal of the capita] 
from Damascus to Baghdad. 

The Abbasids were, politically, more in favour of the fanatics 
than the Umayyads had been. They did not, however, acquire the 
whole of the empire. One member of the Umayyad family escaped 
the general massacre, fled to Spain, and was there acknowledged 
as the legitimate ruler. From that time on, Spain was independent 
of the rest of the Mohammedan world. 

Under the early Abbasids the caliphate attained its greatest 
splendour. The best known of them is Hanm-al-Rashid (d. 809) 
who was a contemporary of Charlemagne and the Empress Irene, 
and is known to every one in legendary form through the Arabian 
Nights. His court was a brilliant centre of luxury', poetry, and 
learning; his revenue was enormous; his empire stretched from 
the Straits of Gibraltar to the Indus. His will was absolute; he 
was habitually accompanied by the executioner, who performed 
his office at a nod from the caliph. This splendour, however, was 
short-lived. His successor made the mistake of composing his 
army mainly of Turks, who were insubordinate, and soon reduced 
the caliph to a cipher, to be blinded or murdered whenever the 
soldiery grew tired of him. Nevertheless, the caliphate lingered 
on; the last caliph of the Abbasid dynasty was put to death by 
the Mongols in 1256, along with 800,000 of the inhabitants of 
Baghdad. 

The political and social system of the Arabs had defects similar 
to those of the Roman Empire, together with some others. Abso- 

44* 



MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

lute monarchy combined with polygamy led, as it usually does, to 
dynastic wars whenever a ruler died, ending with the victory of 
one of the ruler's sons and the death of all the rest. There were 
immense numbers of slaves, largely as a result of successful wars; 
at times there were dangerous servile insurrections. Commerce 
was greatly developed, the more so as the caliphate occupied a 
central position between East and West. "Not only did the pos- 
session of enormous wealth create a demand for costly articles, 
such as silks from China, and furs from Northern Europe, but 
trade was promoted by certain special conditions, such as the vast 
extent of the Muslim Empire, the spread of Arabic as a world- 
language, and the exalted status assigned to the merchant in the 
Muslim system of ethics; it was remembered that the Prophet 
himself had been a merchant and had commended trading during 
the pilgrimage to Mecca." 1 This commerce, like military cohesion, 
depended on the great roads which the Arabs inherited from the 
Romans and Persians, and which they, unlike the Northern con- 
querors, did not allow to fall into disrepair. Gradually, however, 
the empire broke up into fractions Spain, Persia, North Africa, 
and Egypt successively split off and acquired complete or almost 
complete independence. 

One of the best features of the Arab economy was agriculture, 
particularly the skilful use of irrigation, which they learnt from 
living where water is scarce. To this day Spanish agriculture 
profits by Arab irrigation works. 

'ITie distinctive culture of the Muslim world, though it began 
in Syria, soon came to flourish most in the Eastern and Western 
extremities, Persia and Spain. The Syrians, at the time of the con- 
quest, were admirers of Aristotle, whom Nestorians preferred to 
Plato, the philosopher favoured by Catholics. The Arabs first 
acquired their knowledge of Greek philosophy from the Syrians, 
and thus, from the beginning, they thought Aristotle more im- 
portant than Plato. Nevertheless, their Aristotle wore a Neo- 
platonic dress. Kindi (d. ca. 873), the first to write philosophy in 
Arabic, and the only philosopher of note who was himself an Arab, 
translated parts of the Enneads of Plotinus, and published his 
translation under the title The Theology of Aristotle. This intro- 
duced great confusion into Arabic ideas of Aristotle, from which 
it took centuries to recover. 

> Cambridge Medieval History, IV, 286. 

443 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Meanwhile, in Persia, Muslims came in contact with India. It 
was from Sanskrit writings that they acquired, during the eighth 
century, their first knowledge of astronomy. About 830, Muham- 
mad ibn Musa al-Khwarazmi, a translator of mathematical and 
astronomical books from the Sanskrit, published a book which 
was translated into Latin in the twelfth century, under the title 
Algoritm de numero Indorwn. It was from this book that the West 
first learnt of what we call "Arabic" numerals, which ought to 
be called "Indian." The same author wrote a book on algebra 
which was used in the West as a text-book until the sixteenth 
century. 

Persian civilization remained both intellectually and artistically 
admirable, though it was seriously damaged by the invasion of 
the Mongols in the thirteenth century. Omar Khayyam, the only 
man known to me who was both a poet and a mathematician, 
reformed the calendar in 1079. His best friend, oddly enough, 
was the founder of the sect of the Assassins, the "Old Man of the 
.Mountain," of legendary fame. The Persians were great poets: 
Firdousi (ca. 941), author of the Shalmama, is said by those who 
have read him to be comparable to Homer. They were also remark- 
able as mystics, which other Mohammedans were not. The Sufi 
sect, which still exists, allowed itself great latitude in the mystical 
and allegorical interpretation of orthodox dogma ; it was more or 
less Ncoplatonic. 

The Nestorians, through whom, at first, Greek influences came 
into the Muslim world, were by no means purely Greek in their 
outlook. Their school at Edessa had been closed by the Kmperor 
Zeno in 481 ; its learned men thereupon migrated to Persia, where 
they continued their work, but not without suffering Persian 
influences. The Nestorians valued Aristotle only for his logic, and 
it was above all his logic that the Arabic philosophers thought 
important at first. Later, however, they studied also his Mela- 
physict and his De Anima. Arabic philosophers, in general, are 
encyclopedic: they are interested in alchemy, astrology, astronomy, 
and zoology, as much as in what we should call philosophy. They 
were looked upon with suspicion by the populace, which was 
fanatical and bigoted; tKey owed their safety (when they were 
safe) to the protection of comparatively free-thinking princes. 

Two Mohammedan philosophers, one of Persia, one of Spain, 
demand special notice; they are Avicenna and Averroes. Of these 



MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

the former is the more famous among Mohammedans, the latter 
among Christians. 

Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (980*1037) spent his life in the sort of places 
that one used to think only exist in poetry. He was born in the 
province of Bokhara ; at the age of twenty-four he went to Khiva 
"lone Khiva in the waste" then to Khorassan "the lone 
Chorasmian shore." For a while he taught medicine and philosophy 
at Ispahan; then he settled at Teheran. He was even more famous 
in medicine than in philosophy, though he added little to Galen. 
From the twelfth to the seventeenth century, he was used in 
Europe as a guide to medicine. He was not a saintly character, in 
fact he had a passion for wine and women. He was suspect to the 
orthodox, but was befriended by princes on account of his medical 
skill. At times he got into trouble owing to the hostility of Turkish 
mercenaries; sometimes he was in hiding, sometimes in prison. 
He was the author of an encyclopedia, almost unknown to the 
Hast because of the hostility of theologians, but influential in the 
West through I^atin translations. His psychology has an empirical 
tendency. 

His philosophy is nearer to Aristotle, and less Neoplatonic, than 
that of his Muslim predecessors. Like the Christian scholastics 
later, he is occupied with the problem of universals. Plato said 
they were anterior to things. Aristotle has two views, one when 
he is thinking, the other when he is combating Plato. This makes 
him ideal material for the commentator. 

Avicenna invented a formula, which was repeated by Averroes 
and Albertus Magnus: "Thought brings about the generality in 
forms." From this it might be supposed that he did not believe 
in universals apart from thought. This, however, would be an 
unduly simple view. Genera that is, universals are, he says, at 
once before things, in things, and after things. He explains this 
as follows. They are before things in God's understanding. (God 
decides, for instance, to create cats. This requires that He should 
have the idea "cat," which is thus, in this respect, anterior to 
particular cats.) Genera are in things in natural objects. (When 
cats have been created, felinity is in each of them.) Genera arc 
after things in our thought. (When we have seen many cats, we 
notice their likeness to each other, and arrive at the general idea 
"cat.") This view is obviously intended to reconcile different 
theories. 

445 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Averroes (Ibn Rushd) (1126-98) lived at the opposite end ot 
the Muslim world from Avicenna. He was born at Cordova, where 
his father and grandfather had been cadis; he himself was a cadi, 
first in Seville, then in Cordova. He studied, first, theology and 
jurisprudence, then medicine, mathematics, and philosophy. He 
was recommended to the "Caliph" Abu Yaqub Yusuf as a man 
capable of making an analysis of the works of Aristotle. (It seems, 
however, that he did not know Greek.) This ruler took him into 
favour; in 1184 he made him his physician, but unfortunately 
the patient died two years later. His successor, Yaqub Al-Mansur, 
for eleven years continued his father's patronage; then, alarmed 
by the opposition of the orthodox to the philosopher, he deprived 
him of his position, and exiled him, first to a small place near 
Cordova, and then to Morocco. He was accused of cultivating the 
philosophy of the ancients at the expense of the true faith. Al- 
Mansur published an edict to the effect that God had decreed 
hell-fire for those who thought that truth could be found by the 
unaided reason. All the books that could be found on logic and 
metaphysics were given to the flames. 1 

Shortly after this time the Moorish territory in Spain was 
greatly diminished by Christian conquests. Muslim philosophy in 
Spain ended with Averroes; and in the rest of the Mohammedan 
world a rigid orthodoxy put an end to speculation. 

Ueberweg, rather amusingly, undertakes to defend Averroes 
against the charge of unorthodox}' a matter, one would say, for 
Muslims to decide. Ucberwcg points out that, according to the 
mystics, every text of the Koran had 7 or 70 or 700 layers of inter- 
pretation, the literal meaning being only for the ignorant vulgar. 
It would seem to follow that a philosopher's teaching could not 
possibly conflict with the Koran; for among 700 interpretations 
there would surely be at least one that would fit what the philo- 
sopher had to say. In the Mohammedan world, however, the 
ignorant seem to have objected to all learning that went beyond a 
knowledge of the Holy Book ; it was dangerous, even if no specific 
heresy could be demonstrated. The view of the mystics, that the 
populace should take the Koran literally but wise people need 
not do so, was hardly likely to win wide popular acceptance. 

Averroes was concerned to improve the Arabic interpretation 

1 It it ud that Averroes w*s taken back into favour shortly before hit 
dttittt* 

446 



MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

of Aristotle, which had been unduly influenced by Neoplatonisrn. 
He gave to Aristotle the sort of reverence that is given to the 
founder of a religion much more than was given even by Avi- 
cenna. He holds that the existence of God can be proved by reason 
independently of revelation, a view also held by Thomas Aquinas. 
As regards immortality, he seems to have adhered closely to 
Aristotle, maintaining that the soul is not immortal, but intellect 
(nous) is. This, however, does not secure personal immortality, 
since intellect is one and the same when manifested in different 
persons. This view, naturally, was combated by Christian 
philosophers. 

Averroes, like most of the later Mohammedan philosophers, 
though a believer, xvas not rigidly orthodox. There was a sect of 
completely orthodox theologians, who objected to all philosophy 
as deleterious to the faith. One of these, named Algazel, wrote a 
hook called Destruction of tlie Philosopliers, pointing out that, since 
all necessary truth is in the Koran, there is no need of speculation 
independent of revelation. Averroes replied by a book called 
Destruction of the Destruction. The religious dogmas that Algazel 
specially upheld against the philosophers were the creation of the 
\\orld in time out of nothing, the reality of the divine attributes, 
and the resurrection of the body. Averroes regards religion as 
containing philosophic truth in allegorical form. This applies in 
particular to creation, which he, in his philosophic capacity, 
interprets in an Aristotelian fashion. 

Averroes is more important in Christian than in Mohammedan 
philosophy. In the latter he was a dead end; in the former, a 
beginning. He was translated into I>atin early in the thirteenth 
century by Michael Scott; as his works belong to the latter half 
of the twelfth century, this is surprising. His influence in Europe 
was very great, not only on the scholastics, but also on a large 
body of unprofessional free-thinkers, who denied immortality 
and were called Averroists. Among professional philosophers, his 
admirers were at first especially among the Franciscans and at 
the University of Paris. But this is a topic which will be dealt 
with in a later chapter. 

Arabic philosophy is not important as original thought. Men 
like Aviccnna and Averroes are essentially commentators. Speaking 
generally, the views of the more scientific philosophers come from 
Aristotle and the Neoplatonbts in logic and metaphysics, from 

447 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Galen in medicine, from Greek and Indian sources in mathematics 
and astronomy, and among mystics religious philosophy has also 
an admixture of old Persian beliefs. Writers in Arabic showed 
some originality in mathematics and in chemistry in the latter 
case, as an incidental result of alchemical researches. Moham- 
medan civilization in its great days was admirable in the arts and 
in many technical ways, but it showed no capacity for independent 
speculation in theoretical matters. Its importance, which must 
not be underrated, is as a transmitter. Between ancient and modern 
European civilization, the dark ages intervened. The Moham- 
medans and the Byzantines, while lacking the intellectual energy 
required for innovation, preserved the apparatus of civilization 
education, books, and learned leisure. Both stimulated the West 
when it emerged from barbarism the Mohammedans chiefly in 
the thirteenth century, the Byzantines chiefly in the fifteenth. In 
each case the stimulus produced new thought better than any 
produced by the transmitters in the one case scholasticism, in 
the other the Renaissance (which however had other causes also). 

Between the Spanish Moors and the Christians, the Jews formed 
a useful link. There were many Jews in Spain, who remained when 
the country was reconquered by the Christians. Since they knew 
Arabic, and perforce acquired the language of the Christians, they 
were able to supply translations. Another means of transfusion 
arose through Mohammedan persecution of Aristotelians in the 
thirteenth century, which led Moorish philosophers to take refuge 
with Jews, especially in Provence. 

The Spanish Jews produced one philosopher of importance, 
Maimonides. He was born in Cordova in 1135, but went to Cairo 
at the age of thirty, and stayed there for the rest of his life, lie 
wrote in Arabic, but was immediately translated into Hebrew. A 
few decades after his death, he was translated into Latin, probably 
at the request of the Emperor Frederick II. He wrote a book 
called Guide to Wander en, addressed to philosophers who have 
lost their faith. Its purpose is to reconcile Aristotle with Jewish 
theology. Aristotle is the authority on the sublunary world, reve- 
lation on the heavenly. But philosophy and revelation come to- 
gether in the knowledge of God. The pursuit of truth is a religious 
duty. Astrology is rejected. The Pentateuch is not always to be 
taken literally; when the literal sense conflicts with reason, we 
must seek an allegorical interpretation. As against Aristotle, he 

44* 



MOHAMMEDAN CULTURE AND PHILOSOPHY 

maintains that God created not only form, but matter, out of 
nothing. He gives a summary of the Timaeus (which he knew in 
Arabic), preferring it on some points to Aristotle. The essence of 
God is unknowable, being above all predicated perfections. The 
Jews considered htm heretical, and went so far as to invoke the 
Christian ecclesiastical authorities against him. Some think that 
he influenced Spinoza, but this is very questionable. 



F 1 




Chapter XI 
THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

IOUR aspects of the twelfth century are specially interesting 
to us: 



(1) The continued conflict of empire and papacy; 

(2) The rise of the Lombard cities; 

(3) The Crusades; and 

(4) The growth of scholasticism. 

All these four continued into the following century. The 
Crusades gradually came to an inglorious end ; but, as regards the 
other three movements, the thirteenth century marks the cul- 
mination of what, in the twelfth, is in a transitional stage. In the 
thirteenth century, the Pope definitely triumphed over the 
Emperor, the Lombard cities acquired secure independence and 
scholasticism reached its highest point. All this, however, was an 
outcome of what the twelfth century had prepared. 

Not only the first of these four movements, but the other three 
also, are intimately bound up with the increase of papal and 
ecclesiastical power. The Pope was in alliance with the Lombard 
cities against the Emperor; Pope Urban II inaugurated the first 
Crusade, and subsequent popes were the main promoters of the 
later ones; the scholastic philosophers were all clerics, and Church 
councils took care to keep them within the bounds of orthodoxy, 
or discipline them if they strayed. Undoubtedly, their sense of 
the political triumph of the Church, in which they felt themselves 
participants, stimulated their intellectual initiative. 

One of the curious things about the Middle Ages is that they 
were original and creative without knowing it. All parties justified 
their policies by antiquarian and archaistic arguments. The 
Emperor appealed, in Germany, to the feudal principles of the 
time of Charlemagne; in Italy, to Roman law and the power of 
ancient Emperors. The Lombard cities went still further back, to 
the institutions of repubKcan Rome. The papal party based its 
claims partly on the forged Donation of Constantine, partly on 
the relations of Saul and Samuel as told in the Old Testament. 
The scholastics appealed either to the Scriptures or at first to 

450 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

Plato and then to Aristotle; when they were original, they tried 
to conceal the fact. The Crusades were an endeavour to restore 
the state of affairs that had existed before the rise of Islam. 

We must not be deceived by this literary archaism. Only in the 
case of the Emperor did it correspond with the facts. Feudalism 
was in decay, especially in Italy; the Roman Empire was a mere 
memory. Accordingly, the Emperor was defeated. The cities of 
North Italy, while, in their later development, they showed much 
similarity to the cities of ancient Greece, repeated the pattern, 
not from imitation, but from similarity of circumstances: that of 
small, rich, highly civilized republican commercial communities 
surrounded by monarchies at a lower level of culture. The scho- 
lastics, however they might revere Aristotle, showed more ori- 
ginality than any of the Arabs more, indeed, than any one since 
Plotinus, or at any rate since Augustine. In politics as in thought, 
there was the same distinguished originality. 

CONFLICT OF EMPIRE AND PAPACY 

From the time of Gregory VII to the middle of the thirteenth 
century, European history centres round the struggle for power 
between the Church and the lay monarchs primarily the Em- 
peror, but also, on occasion, the kings of France and England. 
Gregory's pontificate had ended in apparent disaster, but his 
policies were resumed, though with more moderation, by Urban II 
(1088-99), who repeated the decrees against lay investiture, 
and desired episcopal elections to be made freely by clergy and 
people. (The share of the people was, no doubt, to be purely 
formal.) In practice, however, he did not quarrel with lay appoint- 
ments if they were good. 

At first, Urban was safe only in Norman territory. But in 1093 
Henry IV's son Conrad rebelled against his father, and, in alliance 
with the Pope, conquered North Italy, where the Lombard 
League, an alliance of cities with Milan at its head, favoured the 
Pope. In 1094, Urban made a triumphal procession through 
North Italy and France. He triumphed over Philip, King of 
France, who desired a divorce, and was therefore excommunicated 
by the Pope, but submitted. At the Council of Clermont, in 1095, 
Urban proclaimed the first Crusade, which produced a wave of 
religious enthusiasm leading to increase of papal power also to 

45' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

atrocious pogroms of Jews. The last year of Urban's life he spent 
in safety in Rome, where popes were seldom safe. 

The next Pope, Paschal II, like Urban, came from Cluny. He 
continued the struggle on investitures, and was successful in 
France and England. But after the death of Henry IV in 1 106, the 
next Emperor, Henry V, got the better of the Pope, who was an 
unworldly man and allowed his saintliness to outweigh his political 
sense. The Pope proposed that the Emperor should renounce 
investitures, but in return bishops and abbots should renounce 
temporal possessions. The Emperor professed to agree ; but when 
the suggested compromise was made public, the ecclesiastics 
rebelled furiously against the Pope. The Emperor, who was in 
Rome, took the opportunity to seize the Pope, who yielded to 
threats, gave way on investitures, and crowned Henry V. Eleven 
years later, however, by the Concordat of Worms in 1122, Pope 
Calixtus II compelled Henry V to give way on investitures, 
and to surrender control over episcopal elections in Burgundy 
and Italy. 

So far, the net result of the struggle was that the Pope, who had 
been subject to Henry III, had become the equal of the Emperor. 
At the same time, he had become more completely sovereign in 
the Church, which he governed by means of legates. This increase 
of papal power had diminished the relative importance of bishops. 
Papal elections were now free from lay control, and ecclesiastics 
generally were more virtuous than they had been before the 
reform movement. 



RISE OF THE LOMBARD CITIKS 

The next stage was connected with the Emperor Frederick 
Barbarossa (1152-90), an able and energetic man, who would 
have succeeded in any enterprise in which success was possible. 
He was a man of education, who read Latin with pleasure, though 
he spoke it with difficult)'. His classical learning was considerable, 
and he was an admirer of Roman law. He thought of himself as 
the heir of the Roman Emperors, and hoped to acquire their 
power. But as a German he was unpopular in Italy. The Lombard 
cities, while willing to acknowledge his formal overlordship, 
objected when he interfered in their affairs except those which 
feared Milan, against which city some of them invoked his pro* 

45* 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

tection. The Patarine movement in Milan continued, and was 
associated with a more or less democratic tendency; most, but by 
no means all, of the North Italian cities sympathized with Milan, 
and made common cause against the Emperor. 

Hadrian IV, a vigorous Englishman who had been a missionary 
in Norway, became Pope two years after the accession of Bar- 
barossa, and was, at first, on good terms with him. They were 
reconciled by a common enmity. The city of Rome claimed inde- 
pendence from both alike, and, as a help in the struggle, had 
invited a saintly heretic, Arnold of Brescia. 1 His heresy was very 
grave: he maintained that "clerks who have estates, bishops who 
hold fiefs, monks who possess property, cannot be saved." He 
held this view because he thought that the clergy ought to devote 
themselves entirely to spiritual matters. No one questioned his 
sincere austerity, although he was accounted wicked on account 
of his heresy. St. Bernard, who vehemently opposed him, said, 
"He neither eats nor drinks, but only, like the Devil, hungers and 
thirsts for the blood of souls." Hadrian's predecessor in the 
papacy had written to Barbarossa to complain that Arnold sup- 
ported the popular faction, which wished to elect one hundred 
senators and two consuls, and to have an Emperor of their own. 
Frederick, who was setting out for Italy, was naturally scandalized. 
The Roman demand for communal liberty, which was encouraged 
by Arnold, led to a riot in which a cardinal was killed. The newly- 
elected Pope Hadrian thereupon placed Rome under an interdict. 
It was Holy Week, and superstition got the better of the Romans; 
they submitted, and promised to banish Arnold. He hid, but was 
captured by the Emperor's troops. He was burnt, and his ashes 
were thrown into the Tiber, for fear of their being preserved as 
holy relics. After a delay caused by Frederick's unwillingness to 
hold the Pope's bridle and stirrup while he dismounted, the Pope 
crowned the Kmpcror in 1 155 amid the resistance of the populace, 
which was quelled with great slaughter. 

The honest man being disposed of, the practical politicians 
were free to resume their quarrel. 

The Pope, having made peace with the Normans, ventured in 

1 1 57 to break with the Emperor. For twenty years there was almost 

continuous war between the Emperor on the one side, and the 

Pope with the Lombard cities on the other. The Normans mostly 

1 He was mid to he a pupil of Abtiard, but thin is doubtful. 

453 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

supported the Pope. The bulk of the fighting against the Emperor 
was done by the Lombard League, which spoke of "liberty" and 
was inspired by intense popular feeling. The Emperor besieged 
various cities, and in 1162 even captured Milan, which he razed 
to the ground, compelling its citizens to live elsewhere. But five 
years later the League rebuilt Milan and the former inhabitants 
returned. In this same year, the Emperor, duly provided with an 
antipope, 1 marched on Rome with a great army. The Pope fled, 
and his cause seemed desperate, but pestilence destroyed Fred- 
crick's army, and he returned to Germany a solitary fugitive. 
Although not only Sicily, but the Greek Emperor, now sided 
with the Lombard League, Barbarossa made another attempt, 
ending in his defeat at the battle of Legnano in 1176. After this 
he was compelled to make peace, leaving to the cities all the sub- 
stance of liberty. In the conflict between Empire and papacy^ 
however, the terms of peace gave neither party complete victory. 

Barbarossa 's end was seemly. In 1189 he went on the third 
Crusade, and in the following year he died. 

The rise of free cities is what proved of most ultimate importance 
in this long strife. The power of the Emperor was associated with 
the decaying feudal system; the power of the Pope, though still 
growing, was largely dependent upon the world's need of him as 
an antagonist to the Emperor, and therefore decayed when the 
Empire ceased to be a menace; but the power of the cities was 
new, a result of economic progress, and a source of new political 
forms. Although this does not appear in the twelfth century, the 
Italian cities, before long, developed a non-clerical culture which 
reached the very highest levels in literature, in art, and in science. 
All this was rendered possible by their successful resistance to 
Barbarossa. 

All the great cities of Northern Italy lived by trade, and in the 
twelfth century the more settled conditions made traders more 
prosperous than before. The maritime cities, Venice, Genoa, and 
Pisa, never had to fight for their liberty, and were therefore less 
hostile to the Emperor than the cities at the foot of the Alps, 

1 There was an antipope 'throughout most of this time. At the death of 
Hadrian IV, the two claimants, Alexander III and Victor IV, had tug- 
of-war for the papal mantle. Victor IV (who was the antipope), having 
failed to snatch the mantle, obtained from hia partisans a substitute 
which he bad had prepared, but in bis haste be put it on inside-out. 

454 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

which were important to him as the gateways to Italy. It is for 
this reason that Milan is the most interesting and important of 
Italian cities at this time. 

Until the time of Henry III, the Milanese had usually been 
content to follow their archbishop. But the Patarine movement, 
mentioned in an earlier chapter, changed this: the archbishop 
sided with the nobility, while a powerful popular movement 
opposed him and them. Some beginnings of democracy resulted, 
and a constitution arose under which the rulers of the city were 
elected by the citizens. In various northern cities, but especially 
in Bologna, there was a learned class of lay lawyers, well versed 
in Roman law; moreover the rich laity, from the twelfth century 
onwards, were much better educated than the feudal nobility 
north of the Alps. Although they sided with the Pope against the 
Emperor, the rich commercial cities were not ecclesiastical in their 
outlook. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, many of them 
adopted heresies of a Puritan sort, like the merchants of England 
and Holland after the Reformation. Later, they tended to be free- 
thinkers, paying lip-service to the Church, but destitute of all 
real piety. Dante is the last of the old type, Boccaccio the first of 
the new. 



THE CRUSADES 

The Crusades need not concern us as wars, but they have a 
certain importance in relation to culture. It was natural for the 
papacy to take the lead in the initiating of a Crusade, since the 
object was (at least ostensibly) religious ; thus the power of the 
popes was increased by the war propaganda and by the religious 
zeal that was excited. Another important effect was the massacre 
of large numbers of Jews; those who were not massacred were 
often despoiled of their property and forcibly baptized. There 
were large-scale murders of Jews in Germany at the time of the 
first Crusade, and in England, at the time of the third Crusade, 
on the accession of Richard Cceur de Lion. York, where the first 
Christian Emperor had begun his reign, was the scene of one of 
the most appalling mass-atrocities again* Jews. The Jews, before 
the Crusades, had almost a monopoly of the trade in Eastern 
goods throughout Europe; after the Crusades, as a result of the 
persecution of Jews, this trade was largely in Christian hands. 

455 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Another and very different effect of the Crusades was to stimulate 
literary intercourse with Constantinople. During the twelfth and 
early thirteenth centuries, many translations from Greek into 
Latin were made as a result of this intercourse. There had always 
been much trade with Constantinople, especially by Venetians; 
but Italian traders did not trouble themselves with Greek classics, 
any more than English or American traders in Shanghai troubled 
themselves with the classics of China. (European knowledge of 
Chinese classics was derived mainly from missionaries.) 

THE GROWTH OF SCHOLASTICISM 

Scholasticism, in its narrower sense, begins early in the twelfth 
century. As a philosophic school, it has certain definite charac- 
teristics. First, it is confined within the limits of what appears to 
the writer to be orthodoxy; if his views are condemned by a 
council, he is usually willing to retract. This is not to be attributed 
entirely to cowardice, it is analogous to the submission of a judge 
to the decision of a Court of Appeal. Second, within the limits of 
orthodoxy, Aristotle, who gradually became mure fully known 
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, is increasingly 
accepted as the supreme authority ; Plato no longer holds the first 
place. Third, there is a great belief in "dialectic" and in syllogistic 
reasoning; the general temper of the scholastics is minute and 
disputatious rather than mystical. Fourth, the question of uni- 
versals is brought to the fore by the discovery that Aristotle and 
Plato do not agree about it; it would be a mistake to suppose, 
however, that universals are the main concern of the philosophers 
of this period. 

The twelfth century, in this as in other matters, prepares the 
way for the thirteenth, to which the greatest names belong. The 
earlier men have, however, the interest of pioneers. There is a 
new intellectual confidence, and, in spite of the respect for Aris- 
totle, a free and vigorous exercise of reason wherever dogma has 
not made speculation too dangerous. The defects of the scholastic 
method are those that inevitably result from laying stress on 
"dialectic." These defects are: indifference to facts and science, 
belief in reasoning in matters which only observation can decide, 
and an undue emphasis on verbal distinctions and subtleties. 
These defects we had occasion to mention in connection with 

456 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

Plato, but in the scholastics they exist in a much more extreme 
form. 

The first philosopher who can be regarded as strictly a scholastic 
is Roscelin. Not very much is known about him. He was born at 
Compi&gne about 1050, and taught at Loches, in Brittany, where 
AWlard was his pupil. He was accused of heresy at a council at 
Rheims in 1092, and recanted for fear of being stoned to death by 
ecclesiastics with a taste for lynching. He fled to England, but 
there he was rash enough to attack St. Anselm. This time he fled 
to Rome, where he was reconciled to the Church. He disappears 
from history about 1120; the date of his death is purely con- 
jectural. 

Nothing remains of Roscelin's writings except a letter to Abelard 
on the Trinity. In this letter he belittles Abelard and makes merry 
over his castration. Ueberweg, who seldom displays emotion, is 
led to observe that he can't have been a very nice man. Apart 
from this letter, Roscelin's views are chiefly known through the 
controversial writings of Anselm and Abelard. According to 
Anselm, he said that universals are mere flatus vocts, "breath of 
the voice." If this is to be taken literally, it means that a universal 
is a physical occurrence, that, namely, which takes place when we 
pronounce a word. It is hardly to be supposed, however, that 
Roscelin maintained anything so foolish. Anselm says that, 
according to Roscelin, man is not a unity, but only a common 
name; this view Anselm, like a good Platonist, attributes to 
Roscelin's only conceding reality to what is sensible. He seems 
to have held, generally, that a whole which has parts has no 
reality of its own, but is a mere word; the reality is in the parts. 
This view should have led him, and perhaps did lead him, to an 
extreme atomism. In any case, it led him into trouble about the 
Trinity. He considered that the Three Persons are three distinct 
substances, and that only usage stands in the way of our saying 
that there are Three Gods. The alternative, which he does not 
accept, is, according to him, to say that not only the Son, but the 
Father and the Holy Ghost, were incarnate. All this speculation, 
in so far as it was heretical, he recanted at Rheims in 1092. It is 
impossible to know exactly what he thought about universals, 
l>ut at any rate it is plain that he was some sort of nominalist. 

His pupil Abelard (or Abailard) was much abler and much more 
distinguished. He was born near Nantes in 1079, was a pupil of 

457 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

William of Champeaux (a realist) in Paris, and then a teacher in 
the Paris cathedral school, where he combated William's views 
and compelled him to modify them. After a period devoted to the 
study of theology under Anselm of Laon (not the archbishop), 
he returned to Paris in 1113, and acquired extraordinary popu- 
larity as a teacher. It was at this time that he became the lover of 
Helolse, niece of Canon Fulbert. The canon had him castrated, 
and he and Hlloise had to retire from the world, he into a 
monastery at St. Denis, she into a nunnery at Argenteuil. Their 
famous correspondence is said, by a learned German named 
Schmeidler, to have been entirely composed by Abllard as a 
literary fiction. I am not competent to judge as to the correctness 
of this theory, but nothing in Abllard's character makes it im- 
possible. He was always vain, disputatious, and contemptuous; 
after his misfortune he was also angry and humiliated. Heloise's 
letters are much more devoted than his, and one can imagine him 
composing them as a balm to his wounded pride. 

Even in his retirement, he still had great success as a teacher; 
the young liked his cleverness, his dialectical skill, and his irre- 
verence towards their older teachers. Older men felt the correlative 
dislike of him, and in 1121 he was condemned at Soissons for an 
unorthodox book on the Trinity. Having made due submission, 
he became abbot of St. Gildas in Brittany, where he found the 
monks savage boors. After four miserable years in this exile, he 
returned to comparative civilization. His further history is obscure, 
except that he continued to teach with great success, according 
to the testimony of John of Salisbury. In 1141, at the instance of 
St. Bernard, he was again condemned, this time at Sens. He 
retired to Cluny, and died the next year. 

Abelard's most famous book, composed in 1121-22, is Sic et 
Aoif, "Yes and No." Here he gives dialectical arguments for and 
against a great variety of theses, often without attempting to arrive 
at a conclusion; clearly he likes the disputation itself, and con- 
siders it useful as sharpening the wits. The book had a con- 
siderable effect in waking people from their dogmatic slumbers. 
Abllard's view, that (apart from Scripture) dialectic is the sole 
road to truth, while no empiricist can accept it, had, at the time, 
a valuable effect as a solvent of prejudices and an encouragement 
to the fearless use of the intellect. Nothing outside the Scriptures, 
he said, is infallible; even Apostles and Fathers may err* 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

His valuation of logic was, from a modern point of view, 
excessive. He considered it pre-eminently the Christian science, 
and made play with its derivation from "Logos." "In the be- 
ginning was the Logos/' says St. John's Gospel, and this, he 
thought, proves the dignity of Logic. 

His chief importance is in logic and theory of knowledge. His 
philosophy is a critical analysis, largely linguistic. As for universals, 
i.e. what can be predicated of many different things, he holds 
that we do not predicate a thing, but a word. In this sense he is a 
nominalist. But as against Roscelin he points out that a "flatus 
vocis" is a thing ; it is not the word as a physical occurrence that 
we predicate, but the word as meaning. Here he appeals to Aristotle. 
Things, he says, resemble each other, and these resemblances give 
rise to universals. But the point of resemblance between two 
similar things is not itself a thing; this is the mistake of realism. 
He says some things that are even more hostile to realism, for 
example, that general concepts arc not based in the nature of 
things, but are confused images of many things. Nevertheless he 
does not wholly refuse a place to Platonic ideas : they exist in the 
divine mind as patterns for creation; they are, in fact, God's 
concepts. 

All this, whether right or wrong, is certainly very able. The 
most modern discussions of the problem of universals have not 
got much further. 

St. Bernard, whose saintliness did not suffice to make hint 
intelligent, 1 failed to understand Abelard, and brought unjust 
accusations against him. He asserted that Abelard treats the 
Trinity like an Arian, grace like a Pelagian, and the Person of 
Christ like a Nestorian; that he proves himself a heathen in 
sweating to prove Plato a Christian; and further, that he destroys 
the merit of the Christian faith by maintaining that God can be 
completely understood by human reason. In fact, Abelard never 
maintained this last, and always left a large province to faith, 
although, like St. Anselm, he thought that the Trinity could be 
rationally demonstrated without the help of revelation. It is true 
that, at one time, he identified the Holy Ghost with the Platonic 
Soul of the World, but he abandoned this view as soon as its 
heretical character was pointed out to him. Probably it was more 

1 M 'Il>e greatness of St. Bernard lay not in the qualities of his intellect, 
but of his chir*ctcT. tt Encyclopadia Britannica. 

459 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

his combativeness than his doctrines that caused him to be 
accused of heresy, for his habit of criticizing pundits made him 
violently unpopular with all influential persons. 

Most of the learned men of the time were less devoted to dia- 
lectic than AWlard was. There was, especially in the School of 
Chartres, a humanistic movement, which admired antiquity, and 
followed Plato and Boethius. There was a renewed interest in 
mathematics: Adelard of Bath went to Spain early in the twelfth 
century, and in consequence translated Euclid. 

As opposed to the dry scholastic method, there was a strong 
mystical movement, of which St. Bernard was the leader. His 
father was a knight who died in the first Crusade. He himself 
was a Cistercian monk, and in 1115 became abbot of the newly- 
founded abbey of Clairvaux. He was very influential in eccle- 
siastical politics turning the scales against antipopes, combating 
heresy in Northern Italy and Southern France, bringing the 
weight of orthodoxy to bear on adventurous philosophers, and 
preaching the second Crusade. In attacking philosophers he was 
usually successful ; but after the collapse of his Crusade he failed 
to secure the conviction of Gilbert de la Porrec, who agreed with 
Boethius more than seemed right to the saintly heresy-hunter. 
Although a politician and a bigot, he was a man of genuinely 
religious temperament, and his Latin hymns have great beauty. 1 
Among those influenced by him, mysticism became increasingly 
dominant, till it passed into something like heresy in Joachim of 
Flora (d. 1202). The influence of this man, however, belongs to 
a later time. St. Bernard and his followers sought religious truth, 
not in reasoning, but in subjective experience and contemplation. 
Abdard and Bernard are perhaps equally one-sided. 

Bernard, as a religious mystic, deplored the absorption of the 
papacy in worldly concerns, and disliked the temporal power. 
Although he preached the Crusade, he did not seem to understand 
that a war requires organization, and cannot be conducted by 
' religious enthusiasm alone. He complains that "the law of Justinian, 
not the law of the Lord" absorbs men's attention. He is shocked 
when the Pope defends his domain by military force. The function 

of the Pope 19 spiritual/ and he should not attempt actual govern - 

','t 

1 Medieval jbatin hymns, rhymed and accentual, give expression, 
aometime^i}>$mc, sometunet gentle and pathetic, to the beat aide of 
fueling of the times. 

460 



THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

ment. This point of view, however, is combined with unbounded 
reverence for the Pope, whom he calls "prince of bishops, heir 
of the apostles, of the primacy of Abel, the governance of Noah, 
the patriarchate of Abraham, the order of Melchizedek, the 
dignity of Aaron, the authority of Moses, in judgeship Samuel, in 
power Peter, in unction Christ." The net result of St. Bernard's 
activities was, of course, a great increase of the power of the Pope 
in secular affairs. 

John of Salisbury, though not an important thinker, is valuable 
for our knowledge of his times, of which he wrote a gossipy 
account. He was secretary to three Archbishops of Canterbury, 
one of whom was Becket; he was a friend of Hadrian IV; at the 
end of his life he was bishop of Chartres, where he died in 1180. 
In matters outside the faith, he was a man of sceptical temper; he 
called himself an Academic (in the sense in which St. Augustine 
uses this term). His respect for kings was limited: "an illiterate 
king is a crowned ass." He revered St. Bernard, but was well aware 
that his attempt to reconcile Plato and Aristotle must be a failure. 
He admired Abelard, but laughed at his theory of universals, and 
at Roscclin's equally. He thought logic a pood introduction to 
learning, but in itself bloodless and sterile. Aristotle, he says, can 
be improved on, even in logic; respect for ancient authors should 
not hamper the critical exercise of reason. Plato U still to him the 
"prince of all philosophers." He knows personally most of the 
learned men of his time, and takes a friendly part in scholastic 
debates. On revisiting one school of philosophy after thirty years, 
he smiles to find them still discussing the same problems. The 
atmosphere of the society that he frequents is very like that of 
Oxford Common Rooms thirty years ago. Towards the end of his 
life, the cathedral schools gave place to universities, and univer- 
sities, at least in England, have had a remarkable continuity from 
that day to this. 

During the twelfth century, translators gradually increased the 
number of Greek books available to Western students. Then; 
three main sources of such translations: Constantinoplg^^ 
and Toledo. Of these Toledo was the most impoj 
translations coming from there were often from 
direct from the Greek. In the second quarter of thej 
Archbishop Raymond of Toledo instituted a collef 
whose work was very fruitful. In 1 128, James of ' 

461 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Aristotle's Analytics, Topics, and Sophistici Elenchi\ the Posterior 
Analytics were found difficult by Western philosophers. Henry 
Aristippus of Catania (d. 1162) translated the Phaedo and Meno, 
but his translations had no immediate effect. Partial as was the 
knowledge of Greek philosophy in the twelfth century, learned 
men were aware that much of it remained to be discovered by the 
West, and a certain eagerness arose to acquire a fuller knowledge 
of antiquity. The yoke of orthodoxy was not so severe as is some- 
times supposed; a man could always write his book, and then, if 
necessary, withdraw its heretical portions after full public dis- 
cussion. Most of the philosophers of the time were French, and 
France was important to the Church as a make-weight against the 
Empire. Whatever theological heresies might occur among them, 
learned clerics were almost all politically orthodox ; this made the 
peculiar wickedness of Arnold of Brescia, who was an exception 
to the rule. The whole of early scholasticism may be viewed, 
politically, as an offshoot of the Church's struggle for power. 



Chapter XII 
THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

IN the thirteenth century the Middle Ages reached a culmina- 
tion. The synthesis which had been gradually built up since 
the fall of Rome became as complete as it was capable of being. 
The fourteenth century brought a dissolution of institutions and 
philosophies; the fifteenth brought the beginning of those that 
we still regard as modern. The great men of the thirteenth century 
were very great: Innocent III, St. Francis, Frederick II, and 
Thomas Aquinas are, in their different ways, supreme representa- 
tives of their respective types. There were also great achievements 
not so definitely associated with great names: the Gothic cathedrals 
of France, the romantic literature of Charlemagne, Arthur, 
and the Niebelungcn, the beginnings of constitutional govern- 
ment in Magna Carta and the House of Commons. The matter 
that concerns us most directly is the scholastic philosophy, 
especially as set forth by Aquinas; but I shall leave this for 
the next chapter, and attempt, first, to give an outline of the 
events that did most to form the mental atmosphere of the 
age. 

The central figure at the beginning of the century is Pope 
Innocent HI (i 198-1216), a shrewd politician, a man of infinite 
vigour, a firm believer in the most extreme claims of the papacy, 
but not endowed with Christian humility. At his consecration, he 
preached from the text: "See, 1 have this day set thee over the 
nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, 
to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant. " He called 
himself "king of kings, lord of lords, a priest for ever and ever 
according to the order of Melchizcdek." In enforcing this view 
of himself, he took advantage of every favourable circumstance. 
In Sicily, which had been conquered by the Emperor Henry VI 
(d. 1197)9 who had married Constance, heiress of the Norman 
kings, the new king was Frederick, only three years old at the 
time of Innocent's accession. The kingdom was turbulent, and 
Constance needed the Pope's help. She made him guardian of the 
infant Frederick, and secured his recognition of her son's rights in 
Sicily by acknowledging papal superiority. Portugal and Aragoo 

463 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

made similar acknowledgments. In England, King John, after 
vehement resistance, was compelled to yield his kingdom to 
Innocent and receive it back as a papal fief. 

To some degree, the Venetians got the better of him in the 
matter of the fourth Crusade. The soldiers of the Cross were to 
embark at Venice, but there were difficulties in procuring enough 
ships. No one had enough except the Venetians, and they main- 
tained (for purely commercial reasons) that it would be much 
better to conquer Constantinople than Jerusalem in any case, 
it would be a useful stepping-stone, and the Eastern Empire had 
never been very friendly to Crusaders. It was found necessary to 
give way to Venice; Constantinople was captured, and a Latin 
Emperor established. At first Innocent was annoyed; but he 
reflected that it might now be possible to re- unite the Eastern 
and Western Churches. (This hope proved vain.) Except in this 
instance, I do not know of anybody who ever in any degree got 
the better of Innocent III. He ordered the great Crusade against 
the Albigenses, which rooted out heresy, happiness, prosperity, 
and culture from southern France. He deposed Raymond, Count 
of Toulouse, for lukewarmness about the Crusade, and secured 
most of the region of the Albigenses for its leader, Simon de 
Montfort, father of the father of Parliament. He quarrelled with 
the Emperor Otto, and called upon the Germans to depose him. 
They did so, and at his suggestion elected Frederick II, now just 
of age, in his stead. But for his support of Frederick he exacted 
a terrific price in promises which, however, Frederick was deter- 
mined to break as soon as possible. 

Innocent III was the first great Pope in whom there was no 
element of sanctity. The reform of the Church made ihe hierarchy 
feel secure as to its moral prestige, and therefore convinced that 
it need no longer trouble to be holy. The power motive, from his 
time on, more and more exclusively dominated the papacy, and 
produced opposition from some religious men even in his day. 
He codified the canon law so as to increase the power of the Curia ; 
Walther von der Vogelweide called this code "the blackest book 
that hell ever gave/ 1 Although the papacy still had resounding 
victories to win, the manner of its subsequent decline might 
already have been foreseen. 

Frederick II, who had been the ward of Innocent III, went to 
Germany in 1212, and by the Pope's help wag elected to replace 

464 



THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

Otto. Innocent did not live to see what a formidable antagonist 
he had raised up against the papacy. 

Frederick one of the most remarkable rulers known to history 
had passed his childhood and youth in difficult and adverse 
circumstances. His father Henry VI (son of Barbarossa) had 
defeated the Normans of Sicily, and married Constance, heiress 
to the kingdom. He established a German garrison, which was 
hated by the Sicilians; but he died in 1197, when Frederick was 
two years old. Constance thereupon turned against the Germans, 
and tried to govern without them by the help of the Pope. The 
Germans were resentful, and Otto tried to conquer Sicily; this 
was the cause of his quarrel with the Pope. Palermo, where 
Frederick passed his childhood, was subject to other troubles. 
There were Muslim revolts; the Pisans and Genoese fought each 
other and everyone else for possession of the island ; the important 
people in Sicily were constantly changing sides, according as one 
party or the other offered the higher price for treachery. Culturally, 
however, Sicily had great advantages. Muslim, Byzantine, Italian, 
and German civilization met and mingled there as nowhere else. 
Greek and Arabic were still living languages in Sicily. Frederick 
learnt to speak six languages fluently, and in all six he was witty. 
He was at home in Arabian philosophy, and had friendly relations 
with Mohammedans, which scandalized pious Christians. He was 
a Hohenstaufen, and in Germany could count as a German. But 
in culture and sentiment he was Italian, with a tincture of Byzan* 
tine and Arab. His contemporaries gazed upon him with astonish- 
ment gradually turning into horror; they called him "wonder of 
the world and marvellous innovator." While still alive, he was 
the subject of myths. He was said to be the author of a book 
l)e Tribus Impostoribus the three impostors were Moses, Christ, 
and Mohammed. This book, which never existed, was attributed, 
successively, to many enemies of the Church, the last of whom 
was Spinoza. 

The words "Guelf" and "Ghibclline" began to be used at the 
time of Frederick's contest with the Emperor Otto. They are cor- 
ruptions of "Welf" and "Waiblingen," the family names of the 
two contestants. (Otto's nephew was an ancestor of the British 
royal family.) 

Innocent III died in 1216; Otto, whom Frederick had defeated, 
died in 1218. The new Pope, Honorius III, was at first on good 

465 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

terms with Frederick, but difficulties soon arose. First, Frederick 
refused to go on crusade; then he had trouble with the Lombard 
cities, which in 1226 contracted an offensive and defensive alliance 
for twenty-five years. They hated the Germans; one of their poets 
wrote fiery verses against them. "Love not the folk of Germany; 
far, far from you be these mad dogs." This seems to have expressed 
the general feeling in Lombardy. Frederick wanted to remain in 
Italy to deal with the cities, but in 1227 Honorius died, and was 
succeeded by Gregory IX, a fiery ascetic who loved St. Francis 
and was beloved by him. (He canonized St. Francis two years 
after his death.) Gregory thought nothing else so important as the 
Crusade, and excommunicated Frederick for not undertaking it. 
Frederick, who had married the daughter and heiress of the King 
of Jerusalem, was willing enough to go when he could, and called 
himself King of Jerusalem. In 1228, while still excommunicate, 
he went; this made Gregory even more angry than his previously 
not going, for how could the crusading host be led by a man 
whom the Pope had banned ? Arrived in Palestine, Frederick made 
friends with the Mohammedans, explained to them that the Chris- 
tians attached importance to Jerusalem although it was of little 
strategic value, and succeeded in inducing them peaceably to 
restore the city to him. This made the Pope still more furious 
one should fight the infidel, not negotiate with him. However, 
Frederick was duly crowned in Jerusalem, and no one could deny 
that he had been successful. Peace between Pope and Emperor 
was restored in 1230. 

During the few years of peace that followed, the Emperor 
devoted himself to the affairs of the kingdom of Sicily. By the 
help of his prime minister, Pietro della Vigna, he promulgated a 
new legal code, derived from Roman law, and showing a high 
level of civilization in his southern dominion ; the code was at 
once translated into Greek, for the benefit of the Greek-speaking 
inhabitants. He founded an important university at Naples. He 
minted gold coins, called "augustals," the first gold coins in the 
West for many centuries. He established freer trade, and abolished 
all internal customs. He even summoned elected representatives 
of the cities to his council, which, however, had only consultative 
powers. 

This period of peace ended when Frederick again came into 
conflict with the Lombard League in 1237; the Pope threw in 

466 



THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

his lot with them, and again excommunicated the Emperor. From 
this time until Frederick's death in 1250, the war was practically 
continuous, growing, on both sides, gradually more bitter, cruel, 
and treacherous. There were great fluctuations of fortune, and 
the issue was still undecided when the Emperor died. But those 
who attempted to be his successors had not his power, and were 
gradually defeated, leaving Italy divided and the Pope victorious. 

Deaths of popes made little difference in the struggle ; each new 
Pope took up his predecessor's policy practically unchanged. 
Gregory IX died in 1241 ; in 1243 Innocent IV, a bitter enemy of 
Frederick, was elected. Louis IX, in spite of his impeccable 
orthodoxy, tried to moderate the fury of Gregory and Innocent IV, 
but in vain. Innocent, especially, rejected all overtures from the 
Emperor, and used all manner of unscrupulous expedients against 
him. He pronounced him deposed, declared a crusade against him, 
and excommunicated all who supported him. The friars preached 
against him, the Muslims rose, there were plots among his promi- 
nent nominal supporters. All this made Frederick increasingly 
cruel; plotters were ferociously punished, and prisoners were 
deprived of the right eye and the right hand. 

At one time during this titanic struggle, Frederick thought of 
founding a new religion, in which he was to be the Messiah, and 
his minister Pictro della Vigna was to take the place of St. Peter. 1 
He did not get so far as to make this project public, but wrote 
about it to della Vigna. Suddenly, however, he became convinced, 
rightly or wrongly, that Pietro was plotting against him; he 
blinded him, and exhibited him publicly in a cage; Pietro, how- 
ever, avoided further suffering by suicide. 

Frederick, in spite of his abilities, could not have succeeded, 
because the antipapal forces that existed in his time were pious 
and democratic, whereas his aim was something like a restoration 
of the pagan Roman Empire. In culture he was enlightened, but 
politically he was retrograde. His court was oriental; he had a 
harem with eunuchs. But it was in this court that Italian poetry 
began; he himself had some merit as a poet. In his conflict with 
the papacy, he published controversial statements as to the dangers 
of ecclesiastical absolutism, which wogld have been applauded in 
the sixteenth century, but fell flat in his own day. The heretics, 
who should have been his allies, appeared to him simply rebels, 
1 Sec the life of Frederick II, by Hermann Kantorowicx. 

467 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and to please the Pope he persecuted them. The free cities, but 
for the Emperor, might have opposed the Pope; but so long as 
Frederick demanded their submission they welcomed the Pope 
as an ally. Thus, although he was free from the superstitions of 
his age, and in culture far above other contemporary rulers, his 
position as Emperor compelled him to oppose all that was politi- 
cally liberal. He failed inevitably, but of all the failures in history 
he remains one of the most interesting. 

The heretics, against whom Innocent III crusaded, and whom 
all rulers (including Frederick) persecuted, deserve study, both in 
themselves and as giving a glimpse of popular feeling, of which, 
otherwise, hardly a hint appears in the writings of the tune. 

The most interesting, and also the largest, of the heretical sects 
were the Cathari, who, in the South of France, are better known 
as Albigenses. Their doctrines came from Asia by way of the 
Balkans; they were widely held in Northern Italy, and in the 
South of France they were held by the great majority, including 
nobles, who liked the excuse to seize Church lands. The cause of 
this wide diffusion of heresy was partly disappointment at the 
failure of the Crusades, but mainly moral disgust at the wealth 
and wickedness of the clergy. There was a widespread feclinp, 
analogous to later puritanism, in favour of personal holiness; this 
was associated with a cult of poverty. The Church was rich and 
largely worldly; very many priests were grossly immoral. The 
friars brought accusations against the older orders and the parish 
priests, asserting abuse of the confessional for purposes of reduc- 
tion; and the enemies of the friars retoited the accusation. There 
can be no doubt that such charges were largely justified. The more 
the Church claimed supremacy on religious grounds, the more 
plain people were shocked by the contrast between profession and 
performance. The same motives which ultimately led to the 
Reformation were operative in the thirteenth century. The main 
difference was that secular rulers were not ready to throw in their 
lot with the heretics; and this was largely because no existing 
philosophy could reconcile heresy with the claims of kings to 
dominion. 

The tenets of the Cathari cannot be known with certainty, as 
we are entirely dependent on the testimony of their enemies. 
Moreover ecclesiastics, being well versed in the history of heresy, 
tended to apply some familiar label, and to attribute to existing 

468 



THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

sects all the tenets of former ones, often on the basis of some not 
very close resemblance. Nevertheless, there is a good deal that is 
almost beyond question. It seems that the Cathari were dualists 
and that, like the Gnostics, they considered the Old Testament 
Jehovah a wicked demiurge, the true God being only revealed in 
the New Testament. They regarded matter as essentially evil, and 
believed that for the virtuous there is no resurrection of the body. 
The wicked, however, will suffer transmigration into the bodies 
of animals. On this ground they were vegetarians, abstaining even 
from eggs, cheese, and milk. They ate fish, however, because they 
believed that fishes are not sexually generated. All sex was abhor- 
rent to them; marriage, some said, is even worse than adultery, 
because it is continuous and complacent. On the other hand, they 
saw no objection to suicide. They accepted the New Testament 
more literally than did the orthodox; they abstained from oaths, 
and turned the other cheek. The persecutors record a case of a 
man accused of heresy, who defended himself by saying that he 
ate meat, lied, swore, and was a good Catholic. 

The stricter precepts of the sect were only to be observed by 
certain exceptionally holy people called the " perfected"; the others 
might cat meat and even marry. 

It is interesting to trace the genealogy of these doctrines. They 
came to Italy and France, by way of the Crusaders, from a sect 
called the Bogomiles in Bulgaria; in 1167, when the Cathari held 
a council near Toulouse, Bulgarian delegates attended. The Bogo- 
miles, in turn, were the result of a fusion of Manichaeans and 
Paulicians. The Paulicians were an Armenian sect who rejected 
infant baptism, purgatory, the invocation of saints, and the 
Trinity; they spread gradually into Thrace, and thence into 
Bulgaria. The Paulicians were followers of Marcion (ca. A.D. 150), 
who considered himself to be following St. Paul in rejecting the 
Jewish elements in Christianity, and who had some affinity with 
the Gnostics without being one of them. 

The only other popular heresy that I shall consider is that of the 
Waldenses. These were the followers of Peter Waldo, an enthusiast 
who, in 1170, started a "crusade" for observance o the law of 
Christ. He gave all his goods to the poor, and founded a society 
called the "Poor Men of Lyons," who practised poverty and a 
strictly virtuous life. At first they had papal approval, but they 
inveighed somewhat too forcibly against the immorality of the 

469 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

clergy, and were condemned by the Council of Verona in 1184. 
Thereupon they decided that every good man is competent to 
preach and expound the Scriptures; they appointed their own 
ministers, and dispensed with the services of die Catholic priest- 
hood. They spread to Lombardy, and to Bohemia, where they 
paved the way for the Hussites. In the Albigensian persecution, 
which affected them also, many fled to Piedmont; it was their 
persecution in Piedmont in Milton's time that occasioned his 
sonnet "Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints.' 1 They survive 
to this day in remote Alpine valleys and in the United States. 

All this heresy alarmed the Church, and vigorous measures were 
taken to suppress it. Innocent III considered that heretics deserved 
death, being guilty of treason to Christ. He called upon the king 
of France to embark upon a crusade against the Albigenscs, which 
was done in 1209. It was conducted with incredible ferocity; 
after the taking of Carcassonne, especially, there was an appalling 
massacre. The ferreting out of heresy had been the business of 
the bishops, but it became too onerous to be performed by men 
who had other duties, and in 1233 Gregory IX founded the 
Inquisition, to take over this part of the work of the episcopate. 
After 1254, those accused by the Inquisition were not allowed 
counsel. If condemned, their property was confiscated in France, 
to the crown. When an accused person was found guilty, he was 
handed over to the secular arm with a prayer that his life might 
be spared; but if the secular authorities failed to burn him, they 
were liable to be themselves brought before the Inquisition. It 
dealt not only with heresy in the ordinary sense, but with sorcery 
and witchcraft. In Spain, it was chiefly directed against crypto- 
Jews. Its work was performed mainly by Dominicans and Fran- 
ciscans. It never penetrated to Scandinavia or England, but the 
English were quite ready to make use of it against Joan of Arc. 
On the whole, it was very successful; at the outset, it completely 
stamped out the Albigensian heresy. 

The Church, in the early thirteenth century, was in danger of a 
revolt scarcely less formidable than that of the sixteenth. From 
this it was saved, very largely, by the rise of the mendicant orders; 
St. Francis and St. Dominic did much more for orthodoxy than 
was done by even the most vigorous popes. 

St. Francis of Assist (1181 or 1182-1226) was one of the moat 
lovable men known to history* He was of a well-to-do family, and 

A70 



THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

in his youth was not averse from ordinary gaieties. But one day, 
as he was riding by a leper, a sudden impulse of pity led him to 
dismount and kiss the man. Soon afterwards, he decided to forgo 
all worldly goods, and devote his life to preaching and good works. 
His father, a respectable business man, was furious, but could 
not deter him. He soon gathered a band of followers, all vowed to 
complete poverty. At first, the Church viewed the movement with 
some suspicion; it seemed too like the "Poor Men of Lyons/ 9 
The first missionaries whom St. Francis sent to distant places 
were taken for heretics, because they practised poverty instead of 
(like the monks) only taking a vow which no one regarded as 
serious. But Innocent III was shrewd enough to see the value of 
the movement, if it could be kept within the bounds of orthodoxy, 
and in 1209 or 1210 he gave recognition to the new order. 
Gregory IX, who was a personal friend of St. Francis, continued 
to favour him, while imposing certain rules which were irksome 
to the Saint's enthusiastic and anarchic impulses. Francis wished 
to interpret the vow of poverty in the strictest possible way; he 
objected to houses or churches for his followers. They were to 
beg their bread, and to have no lodging but what chance hospitality 
provided. In 1219, he travelled to the East and preached before 
the Sultan, who received him courteously but remained a Moham- 
medan. On his return, he found that the Franciscans had built 
themselves a house; he was deeply pained, but the Pope induced 
or compelled him to give way. After his death, Gregory canonized 
him but softened his rule in the article of poverty. 

In the matter of saintliness, Francis has had equals; what makes 
htm unique among saints is his spontaneous happiness, his uni- 
versal love, and his gifts as a poet. His goodness appears always 
devoid of effort, as though it had no dross to overcome. He loved 
all living things, not only as a Christian or a benevolent man, but 
as a poet. His hymn to the sun, written shortly before his death, 
might almost have been written by Ikhnaton the sun-worshipper, 
but not quite Christianity informs it, though not very obviously. 
He felt a duty to lepers, for their sake, not for his; unlike most 
Christian saints, he was more interested in the happiness of others 
titan in his own salvation. He never 'showed any feeling of supe- 
riority, even lo the humblest or most wicked. Thomas of Celano 
said of him that he was more than a saint among saints; among 
sinners he was one of themselves. 

47' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

If Satan existed, the future of the order founded by St. Francis 
would afford him the most exquisite gratification. The saint's 
immediate successor as head of the order, Brother Elias, wallowed 
in luxury, and allowed a complete abandonment of poverty. The 
chief work of the Franciscans in the years immediately following 
the death of their founder was as recruiting sergeants in the bitter 
and bloody wars of Guelfs and Ghibellines. The Inquisition, 
founded seven years after his death, was, in several countries, 
chiefly conducted by Franciscans. A small minority, called the 
Spirituals, remained true to his teaching; many of these were burnt 
by the Inquisition for heresy. These men held that Christ and the 
Apostles owned no property, not even the clothes they wore; this 
opinion was condemned as heretical in 1323 by John XXII. The 
net result of St. Francis's life was to create yet one more wealthy 
and corrupt order, to strengthen the hierarchy, and to facilitate 
the persecution of all who excelled in moral earnestness or freedom 
of thought. In view of his own aims and character, it is impossible 
to imagine any more bitterly ironical outcome. 

St. Dominic (1170-1221) is much less interesting than St. 
Francis. He was a Castilian, and had, like Loyola, a fanatical 
devotion to orthodoxy. His main purpose was to combat heresy, 
and he adopted poverty as a means to this end. He was present 
throughout the Albigensian war, though he is said to have deplored 
some of its more extreme atrocities. The Dominican Order was 
founded in 1215 by Innocent III, and won quick success. The 
only human trait known to me in St. Dominic is his confession 
to Jordan of Saxony that he liked talking to young women better 
than to old ones. In 1242, the Order solemnly decreed that this 
passage should be deleted from Jordan's life of the founder. 

The Dominicans were even more active than the Franciscans 
in the work of the Inquisition. They performed, however, a valu- 
able service to mankind by their devotion to learning. This was 
no part of St. Dominic's intention ; he had decreed that his friars 
were "not to learn secular sciences or liberal arts except by dis- 
pensation/' This rule was abrogated in 1259, after which date 
everything was done to make a studious life easy for Dominicans. 
Manual labour was no part of their duties, and the hours of 
devotion were shortened to give them more time for study. They 
devoted themselves to reconciling Aristotle and Christ; Albertus 
Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, both Dominican*, accomplished 



THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

this task as well as it is capable of being accomplished. The 
authority of Thomas Aquinas was so overwhelming that subse- 
quent Dominicans did not achieve much in philosophy; though 
Francis, even more than Dominic, had disliked learning, the 
greatest names in the immediately following period are Franciscan: 
Roger Bacon, Duns Scot us, and William of Occam were all 
Franciscans. What the friars accomplished for philosophy will be 
the subject of the following chapters. 



473 



Chapter XIII 
ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 

^-T^HOMAS AQUINAS (b. 1225 or 1226, d. 1274) is regarded 
I as the greatest of scholastic philosophers. In all Catholic 

JL educational institutions that teach philosophy his system 
has to be taught as the only right one; this has been the rule 
since a rescript of 1879 by Leo XIII. St. Thomas, therefore, is 
not only of historical interest, but is a living influence, like Plato, 
Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel more, in fact, than the latter two. 
In most respects, he follows Aristotle so closely that the Stagyrite 
has, among Catholics, almost the authority of one of the Fathers ; 
to criticize him in matters of pure philosophy has come to be 
thought almost impious. 1 This was not always the case. In the 
time of Aquinas, the battle for Aristotle, as against Plato, still had 
to be fought The influence of Aquinas secured the victory until 
the Renaissance; then Plato, who became better known than in 
the Middle Ages, again acquired supremacy in the opinion of 
most philosophers. In the seventeenth century, it was possible to 
be orthodox and a Cartesian; Malebranche, though a priest, was 
never censured. But in our day such freedoms are a thing of the 
past; Catholic ecclesiastics must accept St. Thomas if they 
concern themselves with philosophy. 

St. Thomas was the son of the Count of Aquino, whose castle, 
in the kingdom of Naples, was close to Monte Cassino, where the 
education of the "angelic doctor" began. He was for six years at 
Frederick H's university of Naples; then he became a Dominican 
and went to Cologne, to study under Albertus Magnus, who was 
the leading Aristotelian among the philosophers of the time. 
After a period in Cologne and Paris, he returned to Italy in 1259, 
where he spent the rest of his life except for the three years 1269- 
72. During these three years he was in Paris, where the Dominicans, 
on account of their Aristotelianism, were in trouble with the 
university authorities, and were suspected of heretical sympathy 
with the Averroists, who toad a powerful party in the university. 
The Averroists held, on the basis of their interpretation of Ari*- 

1 When I did to in a broadcast, very many protest* from Catholics 
resulted. 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

totle, that the soul, in so far as it is individual, is not immortal; 
immortality belongs only to the intellect, which is impersonal, 
and identical in different intellectual beings. When it was forcibly 
brought to their notice that this doctrine is contrary to the 
Catholic faith, they took reftige in the subterfuge of "double 
truth": one sort, based on reason, in philosophy, and another, 
based on revelation, in theology. All this brought Aristotle into 
bad odour, and St. Thomas, in Paris, was concerned to undo the 
harm done by too close adherence to Arabian doctrines. In this 
he was singularly successful. 

Aquinas, unlike his predecessors, had a really competent know- 
ledge of Aristotle. His friend William of Moerbeke provided him 
with translations from the Greek, and he himself wrote com- 
mentaries. Until his time, men's notions of Aristotle had been 
obscured by Neoplatonic accretions. He, however, followed the 
genuine Aristotle, and disliked Platonism, even as it appears in 
St. Augustine. He succeeded in persuading the Church that Aris- 
totle's system was to be preferred to Plato's as the basis of 
Christian philosophy, and that Mohammedans and Christian 
Averroists had misinterpreted Aristotle. For my part, I should 
say that the De Anima leads much more naturally to the view of 
Averroes than to that of Aquinas; however, the Church, since 
St. Thomas, has thought otherwise. I should say, further, that 
Aristotle's views on most questions of logic and philosophy were 
not final, and have since been proved to be largely erroneous; 
this opinion, also, is not allowed to be professed by any Catholic 
philosopher or teacher of philosophy. 

St. Thomas's most important work, the Summa contra Gentiles, 
was written during the years 1259-64. It is concerned to establish 
the truth of the Christian religion by arguments addressed to a 
reader supposed to be not already a Christian; one gathers that 
the imaginary reader is usually thought of as a man versed in the 
philosophy of the Arabs, He wrote another book, Summa Theo- 
bgiae, of almost equal importance, but of somewhat less interest 
to us because less designed to use arguments not assuming in 
advance the truth of Christianity. 

What follows is an abstract of the Summa contra Gentile*. 

Let us first consider what is meant by "wisdom." A man may 
be wise in some particular pursuit, such as making houses; this 
implies that he knows the means to some particular end. But all 

475 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

particular ends are subordinate to the end of the universe, and 
wisdom per se is concerned with the end of the universe. Now the 
end of the universe is the good of the intellect, i.e. truth. The 
pursuit of wisdom in this sense is the most perfect, sublime, 
profitable, and delightful of pursuits. All this is proved by appeal 
to the authority of the "The Philosopher," i.e. Aristotle. 

My purpose (he says) is to declare the truth which the Catholic 
Faith professes. But here I must have recourse to natural reason, 
since the gentiles do not accept the authority of Scripture. Natural 
reason, however, is deficient in the things of God; it can prove 
some parts of the faith, but not others. It can prove the existence 
of God and the immortality of the soul, but not the Trinity, the 
Incarnation, or the Last Judgment. Whatever is demonstrable is, 
so far as it goes, in accordance with the Christian faith, and nothing 
in revelation is contrary to reason. But it is important to separate 
the parts of the faith which can be proved by reason from those 
which cannot. Accordingly, of the four books into which the 
Summa is divided, the first three make no appeal to revelation, 
except to show that it is in accordance with conclusions reached 
by reason; only in the fourth book are matters treated which 
cannot be known apart from revelation. 

The first step is to prove the existence of God. Some think this 
unnecessary, since the existence of God (they say) is self-evident. 
If we knew God's essence, this would be true, since (as is proved 
later) in God, essence and existence are one. But we do not know 
His essence, except very imperfectly. Wise men know more of His 
essence than do the ignorant, and angels know more than either; 
but no creature knows enough of it to be able to deduce God's 
existence from His essence. On this ground, the ontological 
argument is rejected. 

It is important to remcmlxrr that religious truths which can be 
proved can also be known by faith. The proofs are difficult, and 
can only be understood by the learned ; but faith is necessary also 
to the ignorant, to the young, and to those who, from practical 
preoccupations, have not the leisure to learn philosophy. For them, 
revelation suffices. 

Some say that God is only knowable by faith. They argue that, 
if the principles of demonstration became known to us through 
experience derived from the senses, as is said in the Posterior 
Analytic*, whatever transcends sense cannot be proved. This, 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

however, is false; and even if it were true, God could be known 
from His sensible effects. 

The existence of God is proved, as in Aristotle, by the argument 
of the unmoved mover. 1 There are things which are only moved, 
and other things which both move and are moved. Whatever is 
moved is moved by something, and, since an endless regress is 
impossible, we must arrive somewhere at something which 
moves other things without being moved. This unmoved mover 
is God. It might be objected that this argument involves the 
eternity of movement, which Catholics reject. This would be an 
error: it is valid on the hypothesis of the eternity of movement, 
but is only strengthened by the opposite hypothesis, which 
involves a beginning, and therefore a First Cause. 

In the Summa Theologian, five proofs of God's existence are 
given. First, the argument of the unmoved mover, as above. 
Second, the argument of the First Cause, which again depends 
upon the impossibility of an infinite regress. Third, that there 
must be an ultimate source of all necessity; this is much the same 
as the second argument. Fourth, thai we find various perfections 
in the world, and that these must have their source in something 
completely perfect. Fifth, that we find even lifeless things serving 
a purf*o$e, which must be that of some being outside them, since 
only living things can have an internal purpose. 

To return to the Summa contra Gentiles, having proved the 
existence of God, we can now say many things about Him, but 
these are all, in a sense, negative; God's nature is only known to 
us through what it is not. God is eternal, since He is unmoved; 
He is unchanging, since He contains no passive potentiality. 
David of Dinant (a materialistic pantheist of the early thirteenth 
century) "raved" that God is the same as primary matter; this 
is absurd, since primary matter is pure passivity, and God is pure 
activity. In God, there is no composition, therefore He is not a 
body, because bodies have parts. 

God is His own essence, since otherwise He would not be 
simple, but would be compounded of essence and existence, (This 
point is important.) In God, essence and existence are identical. 
There are no accidents in God. He ca'nnot be specified by any 
substantial difference; He is not in any genus; He cannot be defined. 
But He lack* not the excellence of any genus. Things are in some 
1 But in Aristotle the argument leads to 4? or 55 Gods. 

477 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

ways like God, in others not. It is more fitting to say that things 
are like God than that God is like things. 

God is good, and is His own goodness; He is the good of every 
good. He is intelligent, and His act of intelligence is His essence. 
He understands by His essence, and understands Himself per- 
fectly. (John the Scot, it will be remembered, thought otherwise.) 

Although there is no composition in the divine intellect, God 
understands many things. This might seem a difficulty, but the 
things that He understands have no distinct being in Him. Nor 
do they exist per se, as Plato thought, because forms of natural 
things cannot exist or be understood apart from matter. Never- 
theless, God must understand forms before creating. The solution 
of this difficulty is as follows: "The concept of the divine intellect, 
according as He understands Himself, which concept is His 
Word, is the likeness not only of God Himself understood, but 
also of all the things of which the divine essence is the likeness. 
Accordingly many things can be understood by God, by one 
intelligible species which is the divine essence, and by one under- 
stood intention which is the divine Word." 1 Ever}' form, so far 
as it is something positive, is a perfection. God's intellect includes 
in His essence what is proper to each thing, by understanding 
where it is like Him and where unlike ; for instance life, not know- 
ledge, is the essence of a plant, and knowledge, not intellect, is 
the essence of an animal. Thus a plant is like God in being alive, 
but unlike in not having knowledge; an animal is like God in 
having knowledge, but unlike in not having intellect. It is always 
by a negation that a creature differs from God. 

God understands all things at the same instant. His knowledge 
is not a habit, and is not discursive or argumentative. God is 
truth. (This is to be understood literally.) 

We come now to a question which had already troubled both 
Plato and Aristotle. Can God know particular things, or does He 
only know universal and general truths? A Christian, since he 
believes in Providence, must hold that God knows particular 
things; nevertheless, there are weighty arguments against this 
view. St. Thomas enumerates seven such arguments, and then 
proceeds to refute them. The seven arguments are as follows: 

i. Singularity being signate matter, nothing immaterial can 
know it. 

1 Summa centra GentiUt, Book I, chap. liii. 

478 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

2. Singulars do not always exist, and cannot be known when 
they do not exist; therefore they cannot be known by an un- 
changing being. 

3. Singulars are contingent, not necessary; therefore there can 
be no certain knowledge of them except when they exist. 

4. Some singulars are due to volitions, which can only be 
known to the person willing. 

5. Singulars are infinite in number, and the infinite as such is 
unknown. 

6. Singulars are too petty for God's attention. 

7. In some singulars there is evil, but God cannot know evil. 

Aquinas replies that God knows singulars as their cause; that 
He knows things that do not yet exist, just as an artificer does 
when he is making something; that He knows future contingents, 
because He sees each thing in time as if present, He Himself being 
not in time; that He knows our minds and secret wills, and that 
He knows an infinity of things, although we cannot do so. He 
knows trivial things, because nothing is wholly trivial, and every- 
thing has some nobility; otherwise God would know only Himself. 
Moreover the order of the universe is very noble, and this cannot 
be known without knowing even the trivial parts. Finally, God 
knows evil things, because knowing anything good involves 
knowing the opposite evil. 

In God there is Will; His Will is His essence, and its principal 
object is the divine essence. In willing Himself, God wills other 
things also, for God is the end of all things. He wills even things 
that are not yet. He wills His own being and goodness, but other 
things, though He wills them, He does not will necessarily. There 
is free will in God ; a reason can be assigned for His volition, but 
not a cause, lit cannot will things impossible in themselves; for 
example, He cannot make a contradiction true. The Saint's 
example of something beyond even divine power is not an alto- 
gether happy one; he says that God could not make a man be 
an ass. 

In God are delight and joy and love; God hates nothing, and 
possesses the contemplative and active virtues. He is happy, and 
is His own happiness. 

We come now (in Book II) to the consideration of creatures. 
This is useful for refuting errors against God. God created the 
world out of nothing, contrary to the opinions of the ancients. 

479 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The subject of the things that God cannot do is resumed. He 
cannot be a body, or change Himself; He cannot fail; He cannot 
be weary, or forget, or repent, or be angry or sad ; He cannot make 
a man have no soul, or make the sum of the angles of a triangle 
be not two right angles. He cannot undo the past, commit sins, 
make another God, or make Himself not exist. 

Book II is mainly occupied with the soul in man. All intellectual 
substances are immaterial and incorruptible; angels have no bodies, 
but in men the soul is united to a body. It is the form of the body, 
as in Aristotle. There are not three souls in man, but only one. 
The whole soul is present entire in every part of the body. The 
souls of animals, unlike those of men, are not immortal. The 
intellect is part of each man's soul; there is not, as Avcrroes 
maintained, only one intellect, in which various men participate. 
The soul is not transmitted with the semen, but is created afresh 
with each man. There is, it is true, a difficulty: when a man is 
born out of wedlock, this seems to make God an accomplice in 
adultery. This objection, however, is only specious. (There is a 
grave objection, which troubled St. Augustine, and that is as to 
the transmission of original sin. It is the soul that sins, and if the 
soul is not transmitted, but created afresh, how can it inherit the 
sin of Adam? This is not discussed.) 

In connection with the intellect, the problem of universal* is 
discussed. St. Thomas's position is that of Aristotle. Uuiversals 
do not subsist outside the soul, but the intellect, in understanding 
universal, understands things that are outside the soul. 

The Third Book is largely concerned with ethical questions. 
Evil is unintentional, not an essence, and has an accidental cause 
which is good. All things tend to be like God who is the end of 
all things. Human happiness does not consist in carnal pleasures, 
honour, glory, wealth, worldly power, or goods of the body, and 
is not seated in the senses. Man's ultimate happiness does not 
consist in acts of moral virtue, because these arc means; it consists 
in the contemplation of God. But the knowledge of God possessed 
by the majority does not suffice; nor the knowledge of Him 
obtained by demonstration ; nor even the knowledge obtained by 
faith. In this life, we cannot see God in His essence, or have 
ultimate happiness; but hereafter we shall see Him face to face. 
(Not literally, we are warned, because God has no face.) This 
will happen, not by our natural power, but by the divine light; 

480 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

and even then, we shall not see all of Him. By this vision we 
become partakers of eternal life, i.e. of life outside time. 

Divine Providence does not exclude evil, contingency, free will, 
chance or luck. Evil comes through second causes, as in the case 
of a good artist with bad tools. 

Angels are not all equals; there is an order amdng them. Each 
angel is the sole specimen of his species, for, since angels have 
no bodies, they can only be distinct through specific differences, 
not through position in space. 

Astrology is to be rejected, for the usual reasons. In answer to 
the question "Is there such a thing as fate?" Aquinas replies that 
we might give the name "fate" to the order impressed by Provi- 
dence, but it is wiser not to do so, as "fate" is a pagan word. 
This leads to an argument that prayer is useful although Provi- 
dence is unchangeable. (1 have failed to follow this argument.) 
(Jod sometimes works miracles, but no one else can. Magic, 
however, is possible with the help of demons; this is not properly 
miraculous, and is not by the help of the stars. 

Divine lore directs us to love God; also, in a lesser degree, our 
neighbour. It forbids fornication, because the father should stay 
with the mother while the children are being reared. It forbids 
birth control, as being against nature; it does not, however, on 
this account forbid life-long celibacy. Matrimony should be indis- 
soluble, because the father is needed in the education of the 
children, both as more rational than the mother, and as having 
more physical strength when punishment is required. Not all 
carnal inteicourse is sinful, since it is natural; but to think the 
married state as good as continence is to fall into the heresy of 
Jovinian. There must be strict monogamy; polygyny is unfair to 
women, and polyandry* makes paternity uncertain. Incest is to 
be forbidden because it would complicate family life. Against 
brother-sister incest there is a very curious argument: that if the 
love of husband and wife were combined with that of brother 
and sister, mutual attraction would be so strong as to cause unduly 
frequent intercourse. 

All these arguments on sexual ethics, it is to be observed, appeal 
to purely rational considerations, not fc> divine commands and 
prohibitions. Here, as throughout the first three books, Aquinas 
is glad, at the end of a piece of reasoning, to quote texts showing 
that reason has led him to a conclusion in harmony with the 

'/lifer* ,1 Wfturtt /./ .j,/At ^Sl Q 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Scriptures, but he does not appeal to authority until his result 
has been reached. 

There is a most lively and interesting discussion of voluntary 
poverty, which, as one might expect, arrives ultimately at a con- 
clusion in harmony with the principles of the mendicant Orders, 
but states the objections with a force and realism which shows 
them to be such as he had actually heard urged by the secular 
clergy. 

He then passes on to sin, predestination, and election, on which 
his view is broadly that of Augustine. By mortal sin a man fort cits 
his last end to all eternity, and therefore eternal punishment is his 
due. No man can be freed from sin except by grace, and yet the 
sinner is to be blamed if he is not converted. Man needs grace 
to persevere in good, but no one can merit divine assistance. God 
is not the cause of sinning, but some He leaves in sin, while others 
He delivers from it. As regards predestination, St. Thomas seems 
to hold, with St. Augustine, that no reason can be given why 
some are elected and go to heaven, while others are left reprobate 
and go to hell. He holds also that no man can enter heaven unless 
he has been baptized. This is not one of the truths that can be 
proved by the unaided reason; it is revealed in John iii. 5.* 

The fourth book is concerned with the Trinity, the Incarnation, 
the supremacy of the Pope, the sacraments, and the resurrection 
of the body. In the main, it is addressed to theologians rattier than 
philosophers, and I shall therefore deal with it briefly. 

There are three ways of knowing God: by reason, by revelation, 
and by intuition of things previously known only by revelation. 
Of the third way, however, he says almost nothing. A writer 
inclined to mysticism would have said more of it than of either 
of the others, but Aquinas 's temperament is ratiocinative rather 
than mystical. 

The Greek Church is blamed for denying the double procession 
of the Holy Ghost and the supremacy of the Pope. We are warned 
that, although Christ was conceived of the Holy Ghost, we must 
not suppose that He was the son of the Holy Ghost according to 
the flesh. 

The sacraments are valid even when dispensed by wicked 
ministers. This was an important point in Church doctrine. Very 

1 "Jeaus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thcc, except a man he 
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.** 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

many priests lived in mortal sin, and pious people feared that such 
priests could not administer the sacraments. This was awkward; 
no one could know if he was really married, or if he had received 
valid absolution. It led to heresy and schism, since the puritanically 
minded sought to establish a separate priesthood of more im- 
peccable virtue. The Church, in consequence, was obliged to 
assert with great emphasis that sin in a priest did not incapacitate 
him for the performance of his functions. 

One of the last questions discussed is the resurrection of the 
body. Here, as elsewhere, Aquinas states very fairly the arguments 
that have been brought against the orthodox position. One of these, 
at first sight, offers great difficulties. What is to happen, asks the 
Saint, to a man who never, throughout his life, ate anything but 
human flesh, and whose parents did likewise? It would seem 
unfair to his victims that they should be deprived of their bodies 
at the last day as a consequence of his greed ; yet, if not, what will 
be left to make up his body ? I am happy to say that this difficulty, 
which might at first sight seem insuperable, is triumphantly met. 
The identity of the body, St. Thomas points out, is not dependent 
on the persistence of the same material particles; during life, by 
the processes of eating and digesting, the matter composing the 
body undergoes perpetual change. The cannibal may, therefore, 
receive the same body at the resurrection, even if it is not com- 
posed of the same matter as was in his body when he died. With 
this comforting thought we may end our abstract of the Summa 
contra Geutiles. 

In its general outlines, the philosophy of Aquinas agrees with 
that of Aristotle, and will be accepted or rejected by a reader in 
the measure in which he accepts or rejects the philosophy of the 
Statryritc. The originality of Aquinas is shown in his adaptation 
of Aristotle to Christian dogma, with a minimum of alteration. 
In his day he was considered a bold innovator; even after his 
death many of his doctrines were condemned by the universities 
of Paris and Oxford. He was even more remarkable for syste- 
matizing than for originality. Even if every one of his doctrines 
were mistaken, the Summa would remain an imposing intellectual 
edifice. When he wishes to refute some doctrine, he states it first, 
often with great force, and almost always with an attempt at 
fairness. The sharpness and clarity with which he distinguishes 
arguments derived from reason and arguments derived from 

483 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

revelation are admirable. He knows Aristotle well, and under- 
stands him thoroughly, which cannot be said of any earlier 
Catholic philosopher. 

These merits, however, seem scarcely sufficient to justify his 
immense reputation. The appeal to reason is, in a sense, insincere, 
since the conclusion to be reached is fixed in advance. Take, for 
example, the indissolubility of marriage. This is advocated on the 
ground that the father is useful in the education of the children, 
(a) because he is more rational than the mother, (b) because, 
being stronger, he is better able to inflict physical punishment. 
A modern educator might retort (a) that there is no reason to 
suppose men in general more rational than women, (b) that the 
sort of punishment that requires great physical strength is not 
desirable in education. He might go on to point out that fathers, 
in the modern world, have scarcely any part in education. But 
no follower of St. Thomas would, on that account, cease to 
believe in lifelong monogamy, because the real grounds of belief 
are not those which are alleged. 

Or take again the arguments professing to prove the existence 
of God. All of these, except the one from teleology in lifeless things, 
depend upon the supposed impossibility of a series having no 
first term. Every mathematician knows that there is no such im- 
possibility; the series of negative integers ending with minus one 
is an instance to the contrary. But here again no Catholic is likely 
to abandon belief in God even if he becomes convinced that St. 
Thomas's arguments are bad ; he will invent other arguments, or 
take refuge in revelation. 

The contentions that God's essence and existence are one and 
the same, that God is His own goodness, His own power, and so 
on, suggest a confusion, found in Plato, but supposed to have 
been avoided by Aristotle, between the manner of being of parti- 
culars and the manner of being of universal. God's essence is, 
one must suppose, of the nature of universals, while His existence 
is not. It is difficult to state this difficulty satisfactorily, since it 
occurs within a logic that can no longer be accepted. But it points 
clearly to some kind of syntactical confusion, without which much 
of the argumentation abodt God would lose its plausibility. 

There is little of the true philosophic spirit in Aquinas, tie does 
not, like the Platonic Socrates, set out to follow wherever the 
argument may lead. lie is not engaged in an inquiry, the result 

484 



SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 

of which it is impossible to know in advance. Before he begins to 
philosophize, he already knows the truth; it is declared in the 
Catholic faith. If he can find apparently rational arguments for 
some parts of the faith, so much the better; if he cannot, he need 
only fall back on revelation. The finding of arguments for a 
conclusion given in advance is not philosophy, but special pleading. 
I cannot, therefore, feel that he deserves to be put on a level 
with the best philosophers either of Greece or of modern times. 



485 



Chapter XIV 
FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

FRANCISCANS, on the whole, were less impeccably orthodox 
than Dominicans. Between the two orders there was keen 
rivalry, and the Franciscans were not inclined to accept the 
authority of St. Thomas. The three most important of Franciscan 
philosophers were Roger Bacon, Duns Scotus, and William of 
Occam. St. Bonaventura and Matthew of Aquasparta also call 
for notice. 

Roger Bacon (ca. 1214-01. 1294) was not greatly admired in his 
own day, but in modern times has been praised far beyond his 
deserts. He was not so much a philosopher, in the narrow sense, 
as a man of universal learning with a passion for mathematics and 
science. Science, in his day, was mixed up with alchemy, and 
thought to be mixed up with black magic; Bacon was constantly 
getting into trouble through being suspected of heresy and magic. 
In 1257, St. Bonaventura, the General of the Franciscan order, 
placed him under surveillance in Paris, and forbade him to publish. 
Nevertheless, while this prohibition was still in force, the papa! 
legate in England, Guy de Foulques, commanded him, contrary 
orders notwithstanding, to write out his philosophy for the benefit 
of the Pope. He therefore produced in a very short time three 
books, Opus Majus, Opus Minus, and Opus Tertium. These seem 
to have produced a good impression, and in 1268 he was allowed 
to return to Oxford, from which he had been removed to a sort 
of imprisonment in Paris. However, nothing could teach him 
caution. He made a practice of contemptuous criticism of all the 
most learned of his contemporaries; in particular, he maintained 
that the translators from Greek and Arabic were grossly incom- 
petent. In 1271, he wrote a book called Compendium Studii 
Pkihsophiae, in which he attacked clerical ignorance. This did 
nothing to add to his popularity among his colleagues, and in 
1278 his books were condemned by the General of the Order, 
and he was put in prison for fourteen years. In 1292 he was 
liberated, but died not long afterwards. 

He was encyclopaedic in his learning, but not systematic. Unlike 
most philosophers of the time, he valued experiment highly, and 

48* 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

illustrated its importance by the theory of the rainbow. He wrote 
well on geography ; Columbus read this part of his work, and was 
influenced by it. He was a good mathematician; he quotes the 
sixth and ninth books of Euclid. He treated of perspective, follow- 
ing Arabic sources. Logic he thought a useless study; alchemy, 
on the other hand, he valued enough to write on it. 

To give an idea of his scope and method, I will summarize 
some parts of the Opus Majus. 

There are, he says, four causes of ignorance: First, the example 
of frail and unsuited authority. (The work being written for the 
Pope, he is careful to say that this does not include the Church.) 
Second, the influence of custom. Third, the opinion of the un- 
learned crowd. (This, one gathers, includes all his contemporaries 
except himself.) Fourth, the concealment of one's ignorance in a 
display of apparent wisdom. From these four plagues, of which 
the fourth is the worst, spring all human evils. 

In supporting an opinion, it is a mistake to argue from the 
wisdom of our ancestors, or from custom, or from common belief. 
In support of his view he quotes Seneca, Cicero, Avicenna, 
Averroes, Adelard of Bath, St. Jerome, and St. Chrysostom. 
These authorities, he seems to think, suffice to prove that one 
should not respect authority. 

His respect for Aristotle is great, but not unbounded. * 4 Only 
Aristotle, together with his followers, has been called philosopher 
in the judgment of all wise men." Like almost all his contem- 
poraries, he uses the designation, "The Philosopher, 11 when he 
speaks of Aristotle, but even the Stagyrite, we are told, did not 
come to the limit of human wisdom. After him, Avicenna was 
"the prince and leader of philosophy," though he did not fully 
understand the rainbow, because he did not recognize its final 
cause, which, according to Genesis, is the dissipation of aqueous 
vapour. (Nevertheless, when Bacon comes to treat of the rainbow, 
he quotes Avicenna with great admiration.) Every now and then 
he says something that has a flavour of orthodoxy, such as that 
the only perfect wisdom is in the Scriptures, as explained by 
canon law and philosophy. But he sounds more sincere when he 
says that there is no objection to getting knowledge from the 
heathen; in addition to Avicenna and Averroes, he quotes Al- 
farabi 1 very often, and Albumazar 1 and others from time to time. 
Follower of Kindi: d. 950. ' Astronomer, 805-885. 

487 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Albumazar is quoted to prove that mathematics was known before 
the Flood and by Noah and his sons ; this, I suppose, is a sample 
of what we may learn from infidels. Bacon praises mathematics 
as the sole (unrevealed) source of certitude, and as needed for 
astronomy and astrology. 

Bacon follows Averroes in holding that the active intellect is a 
substance separated from the soul in essence. He quotes various 
eminent divines, among them Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, as 
also supporting this opinion, which is contrary to that of St. 
Thomas. Apparently contrary passages in Aristotle, he says, are 
due to mistranslation. He does not quote Plato at first hand, but 
at second hand through Cicero, or at third hand through the 
Arabs on Porphyry. Not that he has much respect for Porphyry, 
whose doctrine on universals he calls "childish." 

In modern times Bacon has been praised because he valued 
experiment, as a source of knowledge, more than argument. 
Certainly his interests and his way of dealing with subjects are 
very different from those of the typical scholastics. His encyclo- 
paedic tendencies are like those of the Arabic writers, who evi- 
dently influenced him more profoundly than they did most other 
Christian philosophers. They, like him, were interested in science, 
and believed in magic and astrology, whereas Christians thought 
magic wicked and astrology a delusion. He is astonishing because 
he differs so widely from other medieval Christian philosophers, 
but he had little influence in his own time, and was not, to my 
mind, so scientific as is sometimes thought. English writers used 
to say that he invented gunpowder, but this, of course, is untrue. 

St. Bonaventura (1221-1274), who, as General of the Franciscan 
order, forbade Bacon to publish, was a man of a totally different 
kind. He belonged to the tradition of St. Anselm, whose onto- 
logical argument he upheld. He saw in the new Aristotelianism a 
fundamental opposition to Christianity. He believed in Platonic 
ideas, which, however, only God knows perfectly. In his writings 
Augustine is quoted constantly, but one finds no quotations from 
Arabs, and few from pagan antiquity. 

Matthew of Aquasparta (ca. 1235-1302) was a follower of Bona- 
ventura, but less untouched by the new philosophy. He was a 
Franciscan, and became a cardinal ; he opposed St. Thomas from 
an Augustinian point of view. But to him Aristotle has become 
"The Philosopher*'; he is quoted constantly. Avicenna is fre- 

488 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

quently mentioned ; St. Anselm is quoted with respect, as is the 
pseudo-Dionysius ; but the chief authority is St. Augustine. We 
must, he says, find a middle way between Plato and Aristotle. 
Plato's ideas are "utterly erroneous"; they establish wisdom, but 
not knowledge. On the other hand, Aristotle is also wrong; he 
establishes knowledge, but not wisdom. Our knowledge so it is 
concluded is caused by both lower and higher things, by external 
objects and ideal reasons. 

Duns Scotus (ca. 1270-1308) carried on the Franciscan con- 
troversy with Aquinas. He was born in Scotland or Ulster, became 
a Franciscan at Oxford, and spent his later years at Paris. Against 
St. Thomas, he defended the Immaculate Conception, and in this 
the University of Paris, and ultimately the whole Catholic Church, 
agreed with him. He is Augustinian, but in a less extreme form 
than Bonaventura, or even Matthew of Aquasparta; his differences 
from St. Thomas, like theirs, come of a larger admixture of 
Platonism (via Augustine) in his philosophy. 

He discusses, for example, the question "Whether any sure and 
pure truth can be known naturally by the understanding of the 
wayfarer without the special illumination of the uncreated light?" 
And he argues that it cannot. He supports this view, in his opening 
argument, solely by quotations from St. Augustine; the only diffi- 
culty he finds is Romans i. 20: "The invisible things of God, 
understood by means of those things that have been made, are 
clearly comprehended from the creation of the world." 

Duns Scut us was a moderate realist. He believed in free will 
and had leanings towards Pelagianism. He held that being is no 
different from essence. He was mainly interested in evidence, i.e. 
the kinds of things that can be known without proof. Of these there 
ire three kinds: (i) principles known by themselves, (2) things 
known by experience, (3) our own actions. But without divine 
. Humiliation we can know nothing. 

Most Franciscans followed Duns Scotus rather than Aquinas. 

Duns Scotus held that, since there is no difference between 
being and essence, thc"principle of individuation" i.e. that which 
makes one thing not identical with another must be form, not 
matter. The "principle of individuation" was one of the important 
problems of the scholastic philosophy. In various forms, it has 
remained a problem to the present day. Without reference to any 
particular author, we may perhaps state the problem as follows. 

489 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Among the properties of individual things, some are essential, 
others accidental ; the accidental properties of a thing are those it 
can lose without losing its identity such as wearing a hat, if you 
are a man. The question now arises: given two individual things 
belonging to the same species, do they always differ in essence, or 
is it possible for the essence to be exactly the same in both? 
St. Thomas holds the latter view as regards material substances, 
the former as regards those that are immaterial. Duns Scotus 
holds that there are always differences of essence between two 
different individual things. The view of St. Thomas depends 
upon the theory that pure matter consists of undifferentiated parts, 
which are distinguished solely by difference of position in space. 
Thus a person, consisting of mind and body, may differ physically 
from another person solely by the spatial position of his body. 
(This might happen with identical twins, theoretically.) Duns 
Scotus, on the other hand, holds that if things are distinct, they 
must be distinguished by some qualitative difference. This view, 
clearly, is nearer to Platonism than is that of St. Thomas. 

Various stages have to be traversed before we can state this 
problem in modern terms. The first step, which was taken by 
Leibniz, was to get rid of the distinction between essential and 
accidental properties, which, like many that the scholastics took 
over from Aristotle, turns out to be unreal as soon as we attempt 
to state it carefully. We thus have, instead of "essence," "all the 
propositions that are true of the thing in question/ 1 (In general, 
however, spatial and temporal position would still be excluded.) 
Leibniz contends that it is impossible for two things to be exactly 
alike in this sense; this is his principle of the "identity of indis- 
cernibles." This principle was criticized by physicists, who main- 
tained that two particles of matter might differ solely as regards 
position in space and time a view which has been rendered 
more difficult by relativity, which reduces space and time to 
relations. 

A further step is required in modernizing the problem, and that 
is, to get rid of the conception of "substance." When this is done, 
a "thing" has to be a bundle of qualities, since there is no longer 
any kernel of pure "thinghood." It would seem to follow that, if 
"substance is rejected, we must take a view more akin to that 
of Scotus than to that of Aquinas. This, however, involves much 
difficulty in connection with space and time. I have treated the 

490 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

question as I sec it, under the heading "Proper Names/' in my 
Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. 

William of Occam is, after St. Thomas, the most important 
schoolman. The circumstances of his life are very imperfectly 
known. He was born probably between 1290 and 1300; he died 
on April loth, but whether in 1349 or 1350 is uncertain. (The 
Black Death was raging in 1349, so that this is perhaps the more 
probable year.) Most people say he was born at Ockham in Surrey, 
but Delisle Burns prefers Ockham in Yorkshire. He was at Oxford, 
and then at Paris, where he was first the pupil and afterwards 
the rival of Duns Scotus. He was involved in the quarrel of the 
Franciscan order with Pope John XXII on the subject of poverty. 
The Pope had persecuted the Spirituals, with the support of 
Michael of Cesena, General of the Order. But there had been an 
arrangement by which property left to the friars was given by 
them to the Pope, who allowed them the benefit of it without the 
sin of ownership. This was ended by John XXII, who said they 
should accept outright ownership. At this a majority of the Order, 
headed by Michael of Cesena, rebelled. Occam, who had been 
summoned to Avignon by the Pope to answer charges of heresy 
as to transubstantiation, sided with Michael of Cesena, as did 
another important man, Marsiglio of Padua. All three were ex- 
communicated in 1328, but escaped from Avignon, and took 
refuge with the Emperor Louis. Louis was one of the two 
claimants to the Empire; he was the one favoured by Germany, 
but the other was favoured by the Pope. The Pope excommuni- 
cated Louis, who appealed against him to a General Council. The 
Pope himself was accused of heresy. 

It is said that Occam, on meeting the Emperor, said: "Do you 
defend me with the sword, and I will defend you with the pen." 
At any rate, he and Marsiglio of Padua settled in Munich, under 
the protection of the Emperor, and there wrote political treatises 
of considerable importance. What happened to Occam after the 
Emperor's death in 1338 is uncertain. Some say he was reconciled 
to the Church, but this seems to be false. 

The Empire was no longer what it had been in the Hohenstaufen 
era; and the papacy, though its pretensions had grown continually 
greater, did not command the same reverence as formerly. Clement 
V had moved it to Avignon at the beginning of the fourteenth 
century, and the Pope had become a political subordinate of the 

49' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

King of France. The Empire had sunk even more; it could no 
longer claim even the most shadowy kind of universal dominion, 
because of the strength of France and England; on the other hand, 
the Pope, by subservience to the King of France, also weakened 
his claim to universality in temporal matters. Thus the conflict 
between Pope and Emperor was really a conflict between France 
and Germany. England, under Edward HI, was at war with 
France, and therefore in alliance with Germany; this caused 
England, also, to be anti-papal. The Pope's enemies demanded a 
General Council the only ecclesiastical authority which could 
be regarded as superior to the Pope. 

The character of the opposition to the Pope changed at this 
time. Instead of being merely in favour of the Emperor, it acquired 
a democratic tone, particularly in matters of Church government. 
This gave it a new strength, which ultimately led to the Re- 
formation. 

Dante (1265-1321), though as a poet he was a great innovator, 
was, as a thinker, somewhat behind the times. His book De 
Monarcfua is somewhat Ghibelline in outlook, and would have 
been more timely a hundred years earlier. He regards Emperor 
and Pope as independent, and both divinely appointed. In the 
Divine Comedy, his Satan has three mouths, in which he eternally 
chews Judas Iscariot, Brutus, and Cassius, who are all three 
equally traitors, the first against Christ, the other two against 
Caesar. Dante's thought is interesting, not only in itself, hut as 
that of a layman; but it was not influential, and was hopelessly 
out of date. 

Marsiglio of Padua (1270-1342), on the contrary, inaugurated 
the new form of opposition to the Pope, in which the Emperor 
has mainly a role of decorative dignity. He was a close friend of 
William of Occam, whose political opinions he influenced. Poli- 
tically, he is more important than Occam. He holds that the 
legislator is the majority of the people, and that the majority has 
the right to punish princes. He applies popular sovereignty also 
to the Church, and he includes the laity. There are to be local 
councils of the people, including the laity, who are to elect repre- 
sentatives to General Councils. The General Council alone should 
have power to excommunicate, and to give authoritative inter- 
pretations of Scripture. Thus all believers will have a voice in 
deciding doctrine. The Church is to have no secular authority; 

492 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

there is to be no excommunication without civil concurrence ; and 
the Pope is to have no special powers. 

Occam did not go quite so far as Marsiglio, but he worked out 
a completely democratic method of electing the General Council. 

The conciliar movement came to a head in the early fifteenth 
century, when it was needed to heal the Great Schism. But having 
accomplished this task, it subsided. Its standpoint, as may be seen 
already in Marsiglio, was different from that afterwards adopted, 
in theory, by the Protestants. The Protestants claimed the right 
of private judgment, and were not willing to submit to a General 
Council. They held that religious belief is not a matter to be 
decided by any governmental machinery. Marsiglio, on the con- 
trary, still aims at preserving the unity of the Catholic faith, but 
wishes this to be done by democratic means, not by the papal 
absolutism. In practice, most Protestants, when they acquired 
the government, merely substituted the King for the Pope, and 
thus secured neither liberty of private judgment nor a democratic 
method of deciding doctrinal questions. But in their opposition 
to the Pope they found support in the doctrines of the conciliar 
movement. Of all the schoolmen, Occam was the one whom 
Luther preferred. It must be said that a considerable section of 
Protestants held to the doctrine of private judgment even where 
the State was Protestant. This was the chief point of difference 
between Independents and Presbyterians in the English Civil 
War. 

Occam's political works 1 are written in the style of philosophic 
disputations, with arguments for and against various theses, some- 
times not reaching any conclusion. We are accustomed to a more 
forthright kind of political propaganda, but in his day the form 
he chose was probably effective. 

A few samples will illustrate his method and outlook. 

There is a long treatise called "Eight Questions Concerning the 
Power of the Pope." The first question is whether one man can 
rightfully be supreme both in Church and State. The second: Is 
secular authority derived immediately from God or not? Tliird: 
Has the Pope the right to grant secular jurisdiction to the Emperor 
and other princes? Fourth: Does election by the electors give full 
powers to the German king? Fifth and sixth: What rights does 

1 See Guillelmi de Ockham Opera Politica, Manchester University 
1940. 

493 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the Church acquire through the right of bishops to anoint kings? 
Seventh: Is a coronation ceremony valid if performed by the 
wrong archbishop? Eighth: Does election by the electors give 
the German king the title of Emperor? All these were, at the time, 
burning questions of practical politics. 

Another treatise is on the question whether a prince can obtain 
the goods of the Church without the Pope's permission. This is 
concerned to justify Edward III in taxing the clergy for his war 
with France. It will be remembered that Edward was an ally of 
the Emperor. 

Then comes a "Consultation on a matrimonial cause/ 1 on the 
question whether the Emperor was justified in marrying his 
cousin. 

It will be seen that Occam did his best to deserve the protection 
of the Emperor's sword. 

It is time now to turn to Occam's purely philosophical doctrines. 
On this subject there is a very good book, Ttif Logic of \\illiam 
of Occam, by Ernest E. Moody. Much of what I shall have to say 
is based on this book, which takes a somewhat unusual view, but, 
I think, a correct one. There is a tendency in writers on history 
of philosophy to interpret men in the light of their successors, but 
this is generally a mistake. Occam has been regarded as bringing 
about the breakdown of scholasticism, as a precursor of Descartes 
or Kant or whoever might be the particular commentator's 
favourite among modern philosophers. According to Moody, with 
whom I agree, all this is a mistake. Occam, he holds, was mainly 
concerned to restore a pure Aristotle, freed from both Augustinian 
and Arabic influences. This had also been, to a considerable extent, 
the aim of St. Thomas; but the Franciscans, as we have seen, 
had continued to follow St. Augustine much more closely than 
he did. The interpretation of Occam by modern historians, 
according to Moody, has been vitiated by the desire to find a 
gradual transition from scholastic to modern philosophy ; this has 
caused people to read modern doctrines into him, when in fact 
he is only interpreting Aristotle. 

Occam is best known for a maxim which is not to be found in 
his works, but has acquiied the name of "Occam's razor." This 
maxim says: "Endues are not to be multiplied without necessity." 
Although he did not say this, he said something which has much 
the same effect, namely: "It is vain to do with more what can be 

494 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

done with fewer." That is to say, if everything in some science can 
be interpreted without assuming this or that hypothetical entity, 
there is no ground for assuming it. I have myself found this a 
most fruitful principle in logical analysis. 

In logic, though apparently not in metaphysics, Occam was a 
nominalist ; the nominalists of the fifteenth century 1 looked upon 
him as the founder of their school. He thought that Aristotle had 
been misinterpreted by the Scotists, and that this misinterpreta- 
tion was due partly to the influence of Augustine, partly to 
Avicenna, but partly to an earlier cause, Porphyry's treatise on 
Aristotle's Categories. Porphyry in this treatise raised three 
questions: (i) Are genera and species substances? (2) Are they 
corporeal or incorporeal? (3) If the latter, are they in sensible 
things or separated from them? He raised these questions as 
relevant to Aristotle's Categories, and thus led the Middle Ages 
to interpret the Organon too metaphysically. Aquinas had at- 
tempted to undo this error, but it had been reintroduced by Duns 
Scot us. The result had been that logic and theory of knowledge 
had become dependent on metaphysics and theology. Occam set 
to work to separate them again. 

For Occam, logic is an instrument for the philosophy of nature, 
which can be independent of metaphysics. Logic is the analysis 
of discursive science; science is about things, but logic is not. 
Things are individual, but among terms there are u reversals; 
logic treats of universais, while science uses them without dis- 
cussing them. Logic is concerned with terms or concepts, not as 
psychical states, but as having meaning. "Man is a species" is 
not a proposition of logic, because it requires a knowledge of man. 
Logic deals with things fabricated by the mind within itself, which 
cannot exist except through the existence of reason. A concept is 
a natural sign, a word is a conventional sign. We must distinguish 
when we are speaking of the word as a thing, and when we are 
using it as having meaning, otherwise we may fall into fallacies 
such as: "Man is a species, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates 
is a species." 

Terms which point at things are called "terms of first intention 1 ' ; 

terms which point at terms are called "terms of second intention." 

The terms in science arc of first intention; in logic, of second. 

Metaphysical terms are peculiar in that they signify both things 

1 !:.., Swinrahead. Heytesbury, Gcrson, and d'Ailly 

495 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

signified by words of first intention and things signified by words 
of second intention. There are exactly six metaphysical terms: 
being, thing, something, one, true, good. 1 These terms have the 
peculiarity that they can all be predicated of each other. But logic 
can be pursued independently of them. 

Understanding is of things, not of forms produced by the mind ; 
these are not what is understood, but that by which things are 
understood. Universais, in logic, are only terms or concepts pre- 
dicable of many other terms or concepts. Universal, genus, species 
are terms of second intention, and therefore cannot mean tilings. 
But since one and being are convertible, if a universal existed, it 
would be one, and an individual thing. A universal is merely a 
sign of many things. As to this, Occam agrees with Aquinas, as 
against Averroes, Avicenna, and the Augustinians. Both hold that 
there are only individual things, individual minds, and acts of 
understanding. Both Aquinas and Occam, it is true, admit (he 
universale ante rem, but only to explain creation ; it had to be in 
the mind of God before He could create. But this belongs to 
theology, not to the explanation of human knowledge, which is 
only concerned with the universale post rent. In explaining human 
knowledge, Occam never allows universals to be things. Socrates 
is similar to Plato, he says, but not in virtue of a third thing called 
similarity. Similarity is a term of second intention, and is in the 
mind. (All this is good.) 

Propositions about future contingents, according to Occam, are 
not yet either true or false. He makes no attempt to reconcile this 
view with divine omniscience. Here, as elsewhere, he keeps logic- 
free from metaphysics and theology. 

Some samples of Occam's discussions may be useful. 

He asks: "Whether that which is known by the understanding 
first according to a primacy of generation is the individual." 

Against: The universal is the first and proper object of the 
understanding. 

For: The object ot sense and the object of understanding are 
the same, but the individual is the first object of sense. 

Accordingly, the meaning of the question must be stated, 
(Presumably, because both arguments seem strong.) 

He continues: "The thing outside the soul which is not a sign 

1 I do not here pause to criticize the use to which Occam puu these 
term*. 

496 



FRANCISCAN SCHOOLMEN 

is understood first by such knowledge (i.e. by knowledge which is 
individual), therefore the individual is known first, since every- 
thing outside the soul is individual." 

He goes on to say that abstract knowledge a ways presupposes 
knowledge which is "intuitive" (i.e. of perception), and this is 
caused by individual things. 

He then enumerates four doubts which may arise, and proceeds 
to resolve them. 

He concludes with an affirmative answer to his original question, 
but adds that "the universal is the first object by primacy of 
adequation, not by the primacy of generation." 

The question involved is whether, or how far, perception is the 
source of knowledge. It will be remembered that Plato, in the 
Theaetetus, rejects the definition of knowledge as perception. 
Occam, pretty certainly, did not know the Theaetelus, but if he 
had he would have disagreed with it. 

To the question "whether the sensitive soul and the intellective 
soul are really distinct in man/* he answers that they are, though 
this is hard to prove. One of his arguments is that we may with 
our appetites desire something which with our understanding we 
reject; therefore appetite and understanding belong to different 
subjects. Another argument is that sensations are subjectively in 
the sensitive soul, but not subjectively in the intellective soul. 
Again: the sensitive soul is extended and material, while the 
intellective soul is neither. Four objections are considered, all 
theological, 1 but they are answered. The view taken by Occam 
on this question is not, perhaps, what might be expected. How- 
ever, he agrees with St. Thomas and disagrees with Averroes in 
thinking that each man's intellect is his own, not something 
impersonal. 

Ky insisting on the possibility of studying logic and human 
knowledge without reference to metaphysics and theology, 
Occam's work encouraged scientific research. The Augustinians, 
he said, erred in fii.st supposing things unintelligible and men un- 
intelligent, and then adding a light from Infinity by which know- 
ledge became possible He agreed in this with Aquinas, but 



1 For instance; Betxvccn Good Friday and Faster, Christ's soul 
descended into hell, whereas His body remained in the tomb of Joseph of 
Arimmhca. If the sensitive soul is distinct from the intellective soul, diJ 
Christ's sensitive soul spend this time in hell or in the tomb? 

497 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

differed in emphasis, for Aquinas was primarily a theologian, and 
Occam was, so far as logic is concerned, primarily a secular 
philosopher. 

His attitude gave confidence to students of particular problems, 
for instance, his immediate follower Nicholas of Oresme (d. 1382), 
who investigated planetary theory. This man was, to a certain 
extent, a precursor of Copernicus; he set forth both the geocentric 
and the heliocentric theories, and said that each would explain all 
the facts known in his day, so that there was no way of deciding 
between them. 

After William of Occam there are no more great scholastics. The 
next time for great philosophers began in the late Renaissance. 



498 



Chapter XV 
THE ECLIPSE OF THE PAPACY 

* | IHE thirteenth century had brought to completion a great 
I synthesis, philosophical, theological, political, and social, 
JL which had been slowly built up by the combination of 
many elements. The first element was pure Greek philosophy, 
especially the philosophies of Pythagoras, Parmenides, Plato, and 
Aristotle. Then came, as a result of Alexander's conquests, a great 
influx of oriental beliefs. 1 These, taking advantage of Orphism 
and the Mysteries, transformed the outlook of the Greek-speaking 
world, and ultimately of the Latin-speaking world also. The 
dying and resurrected god, the sacramental eating of what pur- 
ported to be the flesh of the god, the second birth into a new life 
through some ceremony analogous to baptism, came to be part 
of the theology of large sections of the pagan Roman world. With 
these was associated an ethic of liberation from bondage to the 
flesh, which was, at least theoretically, ascetic. From Syria, Egypt, 
Babylonia, and Persia came the institution of a priesthood sepa- 
rated from the lay population, possessed of more or less magical 
powers, and able to exert considerable political influence. Im- 
pressive rituals, largely connected with belief in a life after death, 
came from the same sources. From Persia, in particular, came a 
dualism which regarded the world as the battleground of two 
great hosts, one, which was good, led by Ahura Mazda, the other, 
which was evil, led by Ahriman. Black magic was the kind that 
was worked by the help of Ahriman and his followers in the world 
of spirits. Satan is a development of Ahriman. 

This influx of barbarian ideas and practices was synthesized 
with certain Hellenic elements in the Neoplatonic philosophy. In 
Orphism, Pythagorean ism, and some pans of Plato, the Greeks 
had developed points of view which were easy to combine with 
tliose of the Orient, perhaps because they had been borrowed 
from the East at a much earlier time. With Plotinus and Porphyry 
the development of pagan philosophy Aids. 

The thought of these men, however, though deeply religious, 
was not capable, without much transformation, of inspiring a 
1 Sec Cumont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism. 
499 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

victorious popular religion. Their philosophy was difficult, and 
could not be generally understood ; their way of salvation was too 
intellectual for the masses. Their conservatism led them to uphold 
the traditional religion of Greece, which, however, they had to 
interpret allegorically in order to soften its immoral elements 
and to reconcile it with their philosophical monotheism. The 
Greek religion had fallen into decay, being unable to compete 
with Eastern rituals and theologies. The oracles had become silent, 
and the priesthood had never formed a powerful distinct caste. 
The attempt to revive Greek religion had therefore an archaistic 
character which gave it a certain feebleness and pedantry, espe- 
cially noticeable in the Emperor Julian. Already in the third 
century, it could have been foreseen that some Asiatic religion 
would conquer the Roman world, though at that time there were 
still several competitors which all seemed to have a chance of 
victory. 

Christianity combined elements of strength from various sources. 
From the Jews it accepted a Sacred Book and the doctrine that all 
religions but one are false and evil ; but it avoided the racial ex- 
clusiveness of the Jews and the inconveniences of die Mosaic law. 
Later Judaism had already learnt to believe in the life after death, 
but the Christians gave a new definiteness to heaven and hell, 
and to the ways of reaching the one and escaping the other. 
Easter combined the Jewish Passover with pagan celebrations of 
the resurrected God. Persian dualism was absorbed, but with <i 
firmer assurance of the ultimate omnipotence of the #>od principle, 
and with the addition that the pagan gods were followers of Satan. 
At first the Christians were not the equals of their adversaries in 
philosophy or in ritual, but gradually these deficiencies were 
made good. At first, philosophy was more advanced among the 
semi-Christian Gnostics than among the orthodox ; but from the 
time of Origen onwards, the Christians developed an adequate 
philosophy by modification of Neoplatonibin. Ritual among the 
early Christians is a somewhat obscure subject, but at any rate 
by the time of St. Ambrose it had become extremely impressive. 
The power and the separateneas of the priesthood were taken 
from the East, but were gradually strengthened by methods of 
government, in the Church, which owed much to the practice of 
the Roman Empire. The Old Testament, the utybtcry religions, 
Greek philosophy, and Roman methods of administration were 



THE ECLIPSE OF THE PAPACY 

all blended in the Catholic Church, and combined to give it a 
strength which no earlier social organization had equalled. 

The Western Church, like ancient Rome, developed, though 
more slowly, from a republic into a monarchy. We have seen the 
stages in the growth of papal power, from Gregory the Great 
through Nicholas I, Gregory VII, and Innocent III, to the final 
defeat of the Hohenstaufen in the wars of Guelfs and Ghibellines. 
At the same time Christian philosophy, which had hitherto been 
Augustinian and therefore largely Platonic, was enriched by new 
elements due to contact with Constantinople and the Moham- 
medans. Aristotle, during the thirteenth century, came to be 
known fairly completely in the West, and, by the influence of 
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, was established in the 
minds of the learned as the supreme authority after Scripture and 
the Church. Down to the present day, he has retained this position 
among Catholic philosophers. I cannot but think that the sub- 
stitution of Aristotle for Plato and St. Augustine was a mistake 
from the Christian point of view. Plato's temperament was more 
religious than Aristotle's, and Christian theology had been, from 
almost the first, adapted to Platonism. Plato had taught that 
knowledge is not perception, but a kind of reminiscent vision; 
Aristotle was much more of an empiricist. St. Thomas, little 
though he intended it, prepared the way for the return from 
Platonic dreaming to scientific observation. 

Outward events had more to do than philosophy with the dis- 
integration of the Catholic synthesis which began in the fourteenth 
century. The Byzantine Empire was conquered by the Latins in 
1204, and remained in their hands till 1261. During this time the 
religion of its government was Catholic, not Greek; but after 1261 
Constantinople was lost to the Pope and never recovered, in spite 
of nominal union at Ferrara in 1438. The defeat of the Western 
Empire in its conflict with the papacy proved useless to the 
Church, owing to the rise of national monarchies in France and 
England; throughout most of the fourteenth century the Pope 
was, politically, a tool in the hands of the king of France. More 
important than these causes was the rise of a rich commercial 
class and the increase of knowledge *in the laity. Both of these 
began in Italy, and remained more advanced in that country than 
in other parts of the West until the middle of the sixteenth century. 
North Italian cities were much richer, in the fourteenth century 

501 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

than any of the cities of the North ; and learned laymen, especially 
in law and medicine, were becoming increasingly numerous. 
The cities had a spirit of independence which, now that the 
Emperor was no longer a menace, was apt to turn against the 
Pope. But the same movements, though to a lesser degree, existed 
elsewhere. Flanders prospered ; so did the Hanse towns. In Eng- 
land the wool trade was a source of wealth. The age was one in 
which tendencies which may be broadly called democratic were 
very strong, and nationalistic tendencies were even stronger. The 
papacy, which had become very worldly, appeared largely as a 
taxing agency, drawing to itself vast revenues which most countries 
wished to retain at home. The popes no longer had or deserved 
the moral authority which had given them power. St. Francis 
had been able to work in harmony with Innocent III and Gre- 
gory IX, but the most earnest men of the fourteenth century 
were driven into conflict with the papacy. 

At the beginning of the century, however, these causes of 
decline in the papacy were not yet apparent. Boniface VIII, in 
the Bull Unam Sane tarn, made more extreme claims than had ever 
been made by any previous Pope. He instituted, in 1300, the year 
of Jubilee, when plenary indulgence is granted to all Catholics 
who visit Rome and perform certain ceremonies while there. This 
brought immense sums of money to the coffers of the Curia and 
the pockets of the Roman people. There was to be a Jubilee even' 
hundredth year, but the profits were so great that the period 
was shortened to fifty years, and then to twenty-five, at which it 
remains to the present day. The first Jubilee, that of 1300, showed 
the Pope at the summit of his success, and may be conveniently 
regarded as the date from which the decline began. 

Boniface VIII was an Italian, born at Anagni. He had been 
besieged in the Tower of Ix>ndon when in England, on behalf of 
the Pope, to support Henry III against the rebellious barons, but 
he was rescued in 1267 by the King's son, afterwards Edward I. 
There was already in his day a powerful French party in the 
Church, and his election was opposed by the French cardinals. 
He came into violent conflict with the French king Philip IV, on 
the question whether the King had the right to tax the French 
clergy, Boniface was addicted to nepotism and avarice ; he there- 
fore wished to retain control over as many sources of revenue as 
possible. He waa accused of heresy, probably with justice; it 

502 



THE FCLIPSB OP THE PAPACY 

seems that he was an Averroist and did not believe in immortality. 
His quarrel with the king of France became so bitter that the 
king sent a force to arrest him, with a view to his being deposed 
by a General Council. He was caught at Anagni, but escaped to 
Rome, where he died. After this, for a long time, no pope ventured 
to oppose the king of France. 

After a very brief intermediate reign, the cardinals in 1305 
elected the Archbishop of Bordeaux, who took the name of 
Clement V. He was a Gascon, and consistently represented the 
French party in the Church. Throughout his pontificate he never 
went to Italy. He was crowned in Lyons, and in 1309 he settled 
in Avignon, where the popes remained for about seventy years. 
Clement V signalized his alliance with the king of France by 
their joint action against the Templars. Both needed money, the 
Pope because he was addicted to favouritism and nepotism, Philip 
for the English war, the Flemish revolt, and the costs of an 
increasingly energetic government. After he had plundered the 
bankers of Lombard)', and persecuted the Jews to the limit of 
41 what the traffic would bear, 1 * it occurred to him that the Templars, 
in addition to being bankers, had immense landed estates in 
France, which, with the Pope's help, he might acquire. It was 
therefore arranged that the Church should discover that the 
Templars had fallen into heresy, and that king and pope should 
share the spoils. On a given day in 1307, all the leading Templars 
in France were arrested; a list of leading questions, previously 
drawn up, was put to them all; under torture, they confessed 
that they had done homage to Satan and committed various other 
abominations; at last, in 1313, the Pope suppressed the order, 
and all its property was confiscated. The best account of this 
proceeding is in Henry C. Lea's History of the Inquisition, where, 
after full investigation, the conclusion is reached that the charges 
against the Templars were wholly without foundation. 

In the case of the Templars, the financial interests of pope and 
king coincided. But on most occasions in most parts of Christen- 
dom, they conflicted. In the time of Boniface VIII, Philip IV 
had secured the support of the Estates (even the Estate of the 
Church) in his disputes with the Pope as to taxation. When the 
popes became politically subservient to France, the sovereigns 
hostile to the French king were necessarily hostile to the Pope. 
This led to the protection of William of Occam and Marsiglio of 

S3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Padua by the Emperor; at a slightly later date, it led to the 
protection of Wycliffe by John of Gaunt. 

Bishops, in general, were by this time completely in subjection 
to the Pope; in an increasing proportion, they were actually 
appointed by him. The monastic Orders and the Dominicans 
were equally obedient, but the Franciscans still had a certain 
spirit of independence. This led to their conflict with John XXII, 
which we have already considered in connection with William 
of Occam. During this conflict, Marsiglio persuaded the Emperor 
to march on Rome, where the imperial crown was conferred on 
him by the populace, and a Franciscan antipope was elected 
after the populace had declared John XXII deposed. However, 
nothing came of all this beyond a general diminution of respect 
for the papacy. 

The revolt against papal domination took different forms in 
different places. Sometimes it was associated with monarchical 
nationalism, sometimes with a Puritan horror of the corruption 
and worldliness of the papal court. In Rome itself, the revolt was 
associated with an archaistic democracy. Under Clement VI 
(1342-52) Rome, for a time, sought to free itself from the absentee 
Pope under the leadership of a remarkable man, Cola di Rienzi. 
Rome suffered not only from the rule of the popes, but also from 
the local aristocracy, which continued the turbulence that had 
degraded the papacy in the tenth century. Indeed it was partly 
to escape from the lawless Roman nobles that the popes had fled 
to Avignon. At first Ricnzi, who was the son of a tavern-keeper, 
rebelled only against the nobles, and in this he had the support 
of the Pope. lie roused so much popular enthusiasm that the 
nobles fled (1347). Petrarch, who admired him and wrote an 
ode to him, urged him to continue his great and noble work. lie 
took the title of tribune, and proclaimed the sovereignty of the 
Roman people over the Empire. He seems to have conceived this 
sovereignty democratically, for he called representatives from the 
Italian cities to a sort of parliament. Success, however, gave him 
delusions of grandeur. At this time, as at many others, there 
were rival claimants to the Kmpire. Rienzi summoned both of 
them, and the Electors, to come before him to have the issue 
decided. This naturally turned both imperial candidates against 
him, and also the Pope, who considered that it was for him to 
pronounce judgment in such matters. Rienzi was captured by the 

5<>4 



THE ECLIPSE OF THE PAPACY 

Pope (1352), and kept in prison for two years, until Clement VI 
died. Then he was released, and returned to Rome, where he 
acquired power again for a few months. On this second occasion, 
however, his popularity was brief, and in the end he was murdered 
by the mob. Byron, as well as Petrarch, wrote a poem in his 
praise. 

It became evident that, if the papacy was to remain effectively 
the head of the whole Catholic Church, it must free itself from 
dependence on France by returning to Rome. Moreover, the 
Anglo-French war, in which France was suffering severe defeats, 
made France unsafe. Urban V therefore went to Rome in 1367; 
but Italian politics were too complicated for him, and he returned 
to Avignon shortly before his death. The next Pope, Gregory XI, 
was more resolute. Hostility to the French curia had made many 
Italian towns, especially Florence, bitterly anti-papal, but by 
returning to Rome and opposing the French cardinals Gregory 
did everything in his power to save the situation. Hosvever, at his 
death the French and Roman parties in the College of Cardinals 
proved irreconcilable. In accordance with the wishes of the Roman 
party, an Italian, Dartolomco Prignano, was elected, and took the 
name of I'rban VI. Hut a number of Cardinals declared his 
election uncanonical, and proceeded to elect Robert of Geneva, 
who belonged to the French party. Me took the name of Clement 
VII, and lived in Avignon. 

Thus began the Great Schism, which lasted for some forty 
years. France, of course, recognized the Avignon Pope, and the 
enemies of France recognized the Roman Pope. Scotland was the 
enemy of Kngland, and Kngland of France; therefore Scotland 
recognized the Avignon Pope. Each pope chose cardinals from 
among his own partisans, and when either died his cardinals 
quickly elected another. Thus there was no way of healing the 
schism except by bringing to bear some power superior to both 
popes. It was clear that one of them must be legitimate, therefore 
a power superior to a legitimate pope had to be found. The only 
solution lay in a General Council. The University of Paris, led 
by Gerson, developed a new theory, giving powers of initiative 
to a Council. The lay sovereigns, to wHbm the schism was incon- 
venient, lent their support. At last, in 1409, a Council was sum- 
moned, and met at Pisa. It failed, however, in a ridiculous manner. 
It declared both popes deposed for heresy and schism, and 

505 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

elected a third, who promptly died; but his cardinals elected as 
his successor an ex-pirate named Baldassare Cossa, who took the 
name of John XXIII. Thus the net result was that there were 
three popes instead of two, the conciliar pope being a notorious 
ruffian. At this stage, the situation seemed more hopeless than 
ever. 

But the supporters of the conciliar movement did not give in. 
In 14141 a new Council was summoned at Constance, and pro- 
ceeded to vigorous action. It first decreed that popes cannot dis- 
solve councils, and must submit to them in certain respects; it 
also decided that future popes must summon a General Council 
every seven years. It deposed John XXIII, and induced the 
Roman Pope to resign. The Avignon Pope refused to resign, and 
after his death the king of Aragon caused a successor to be 
elected. But France, at this time at the mercy of England, refused 
to recognize him, and his party dwindled into insignificance and 
finally ceased to exist. Thus at last there was no opposition to the 
Pope chosen by the Council, who was elected in 1417, and took 
the name of Martin V. 

These proceedings were creditable, but the treatment of Huss, 
the Bohemian disciple of Wycliffe, was not. He was brought to 
Constance with the promise of a safe conduct, but when he ^ot 
there he was condemned and suffered death at the stake. Wycliffe 
was safely dead, but the Council ordered his bones to be dug 
up and burnt. The supporters of the conciliar movement were 
anxious to free themselves from all suspicion of unorthodoxy. 

The Council of Constance had healed the schism, but it had 
hoped to do much more, and to substitute a constitutional 
monarchy for the papal absolutism. Martin V had made many 
promises before his election; some he kept, some he broke. Me 
had assented to the decree that a council should be summoned 
every seven years, and to this decree he remained obedient. The 
Council of Constance having been dissolved in 1417,3 new Council 
which proved of no importance, was summoned in 1424; then 
in 1431, another was convoked to meet at Basel. Martin V died 
just at this moment, and his successor Eugenius IV was, through- 
out his pontificate, in bitter conflict with the reformers who 
controlled the Council. lie dissolved the Council, but it refused 
to consider itself dissolved; in 1433 he gave way for a time, but 
in 1437 he dissolved it again. Nevertheless it remained in session 

506 



THE ECLIPSE OF THE PAPACY 

till 1448, by which time it was obvious to all that the Pope had won 
a complete triumph. In 1439 the Council had alienated sympathy 
by declaring the Pope deposed and electing an antipope (the last 
in history), who, however, resigned almost immediately. In the 
same year Eugenius IV won prestige by holding a Council of his 
own at Ferrara, where the Greek Church, in desperate fear of 
the Turks, made a nominal submission to Rome. The papacy thus 
emerged politically triumphant, but with very greatly diminished 
power of inspiring moral reverence. 

Wycliffe (ca. 1320-84) illustrates, by his life and doctrine, the 
diminished authority of the papacy in the fourteenth century. 
Unlike the earlier schoolmen, he was a secular priest, not a monk 
or friar. He had a great reputation in Oxford, where he became a 
doctor of theology in 1372. For a short time he was Master of 
Balliol. He was the last of the important Oxford scholastics. As a 
philosopher, he was not progressive; he was a realist, and a 
Platonist rather than an Aristotelian. He held that God's decrees 
are not arbitrary , as some maintained ; the actual world is not one 
among possible worlds, but is the only possible world, since God 
is bound to choose what is best. All this is not what makes him 
interesting, nor does it seem to have been what most interested 
him, for he retired from Oxford to the life of a country clergyman. 
During the last ten years of his life he was the parish priest of 
Lutterworth, by crovvn appointment. He continued, however, to 
lecture at Oxford. 

Wycliffe is remarkable for the extreme slowness of his develop- 
ment. In 1372, when his age was fifty or more, he was still ortho- 
dox; it was only after this date, apparently, that he became 
heretical. He seems to have been driven into heresy entirely by 
the strength of his moral feelings his sympathy with the poor, 
and his horror of rich worldly ecclesiastics. At first his attack on 
the papacy was only political and moral, not doctrinal; it was only 
gradually that he was driven into wider revolt. 

Wycliffe's departure from orthodoxy began in 1376 with a 
course of lectures at Oxford "On Civil Dominion." He advanced 
the theory that righteousness alone gives the title to dominion 
and property; that unrighteous clergy hive no such title; and that 
the decision as to whether an ecclesiastic should retain his pro- 
perty or not ought to be taken by the civil power. He taught, 
further, that property is the result of sin; Christ and the Apostles 

S<>7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

had no property, and the clergy ought to have none. These 
doctrines offended all clerics except the friars. The English 
government, however, favoured them, for the Pope drew a huge 
tribute from England, and the doctrine that money should not be 
sent out of England to the Pope was a convenient one. This was 
especially the case while the Pope was subservient to France, and 
England was at war with France. John of Gaunt, who held power 
during the minority of Richard II, befriended Wycliffe as long 
as possible. Gregory XI, on the other hand, condemned eighteen 
theses in Wycliffe *s lectures, saying that they were derived from 
IVIarsiglio of Padua. Wycliffe was summoned to appear for trial 
before a tribunal of bishops, but the Queen and the mob protected 
him, while the University of Oxford refused to admit the Pope's 
jurisdiction over its teachers. (Even in those days, English uni- 
versities believed in academic freedom.) 

Meanwhile Wycliffe continued, during 1378 and 1379, to write 
learned treatises, maintaining that the king is God's vicar, and 
that bishops are subject to him. When the preat schism came, he 
went further than before, branding the Pope as Antichrist, and 
saying that acceptance of the Donation of Constantinc had made 
all subsequent popes apostates. He translated the Vulgate into 
English, and established "poor priests," who were secular. (By 
this action he at last annoyed the friars.) He employed the "poor 
priests" as itinerant preachers, whose mission was especially to 
the poor. At last, in attacking sacerdotal power, he was led to 
deny transubstantiation, which he called a deceit and a blasphe- 
mous folly. At this point, John of Gaunt ordered him to be 
silent. 

The Peasants' Revolt of 1381, led by Wat Tyler, made matters 
more difficult for Wycliffe. There is no evidence that he actively 
encouraged it, but, unlike Luther in similar circumstances, he 
refrained from condemning it. John Ball, the Socialist unfrocked 
priest who was one of the leaders, admired Wycliffe, which was 
embarrassing. But as he had been excommunicated in 1366, when 
Wycliffe was still orthodox, he must have arrived independently 
at his opinions. Wycliffe's communistic opinions, though no 
doubt the "poor priests" disseminated them, were, by him, only 
stated in Latin, so that at first hand they were inaccessible to 
peasants. 

It is surprising that Wycliffe did not suffer more than he did 

508 



THE ECLIPSE OF THE PAPACY 

for his opinions and his democratic activities. The University of 
Oxford defended him against the bishops as long as possible. 
When the House of Lords condemned his itinerant preachers, the 
House of Commons refused to concur. No doubt trouble would 
have accumulated if he had lived longer, but when he died in 
1384 he had not yet been formally condemned. He was buried 
at Lutterworth, where he died, and his bones were left in 
peace until the Council of Constance had them dug up and 
burnt. 

His followers in England, the Lollards, were severely perse- 
cuted and practically stamped out. But owing to the fact that 
Richard II's wife was a Bohemian, his doctrines became known 
in Bohemia, where Huss was his disciple; and in Bohemia, in 
spite of persecution, they survived until the Reformation. In 
England, although driven underground, the revolt against the 
papacy remained in men's thoughts, and prepared the soil for 
Protestantism. 

During the fifteenth century, various other causes were added 
to the decline of the papacy to produce a very rapid change, both 
political and cultural, Gunpowder strengthened central govern- 
ments at the expense <! the feudal nobility. In France and England, 
Louis XI and Edward IV allied themselves with the rich middle 
class, who helped tl.cm to quell aristocratic anarchy. Italy, until 
the last years of the century, was fairly free from Northern armies, 
ami advanced rapidly both in wealth and culture. The new culture 
was essentially paijan, admiring Greece and Rome, and despising 
the Middle Ages. Architecture and literary style were adapted to 
ancient models. When Constantinople, the last survival of anti- 
quity, was captured by the Turks, Greek refugees in Italy were 
welcomed by humanists. Yasco da Gama and Columbus enlarged 
the world, and Copernicus enlarged the heavens. The Donation 
of Constantine was rejected as a fable, and overwhelmed with 
scholarly derision. Hy the help of the Byzantines, Plato came to 
he known, not only in Neoplatonic and Augustinian versions, but 
at first hand. This sublunar)' sphere appeared no longer as a vale 
of tears, a place of painful pilgrimage to another world, but as 
atfcirding opportunity for pagan deligllts, for fame and beauty 
and adventure. The long centuries of asceticism were forgotten 
in a riot of art and poetry ami pleasure. Even in Italy, it is true, 
the Middle Ages did riot die without a struggle; Savonarola and 

509 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Leonardo were born in the same year. But in the main the old 
terrors had ceased to be terrifying, and the new liberty of the 
spirit was found intoxicating. The intoxication could not last, 
but for the moment it shut out fear. In this moment of joyful 
liberation the modern world was born. 



510 



Book Three MODERN PHILOSOPHY 

Part i. From the Renaissance to Hume 

Chapter I 
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 

f ^HE period of history which is commonly called "modern" 
I has a mental outlook which differs from that of the medie- 
A. val period in many ways. Of these, two are the most impor- 
tant: the diminishing authority of the Church, and the increasing 
authority of science. With these two, others are connected. The 
culture of modern times is more lay than clerical. States increas- 
ingly replace the Church as the governmental authority that con- 
trols culture. The government of nations is, at first, mainly in the 
hands of kings; then, as in ancient Greece, the kings are gradually 
replaced by democracies or tyrants. The power of the national 
State, and the functions that it performs, grow steadily throughout 
the whole period (apart from some minor fluctuations) ; but at most 
times the State has less influence on the opinions of philosophers 
than the Church had in the Middle Ages. The feudal aristocracy, 
which, north of the Alps, had been able, till the fifteenth century, 
to hold its own against central governments, loses first its political 
and then its economic importance. It is replaced by the king in 
alliance with rich merchants; these two share power in different 
proportions in different countries. There is a tendency for the rich 
merchants to become absorbed into the aristocracy. From the time 
of the American and French Revolutions onwards, democracy, 
in the modern sense, becomes an important political force. 
Socialism, as opposed to democracy based on private property, 
first acquires governmental power in 1917. This form of govern- 
ment, however, if it spreads, must obvi6usly bring with it a new 
form of culture ; the culture with which we shall be concerned is 
in the main 'liberal/' that is to say, of the kind most naturally 
Associated with commerce. To this there are important exceptions, 

5" 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

especially in Germany; Fichte and Hegel, to take two examples, 
have an outlook which is totally unconnected with commerce. But 
such exceptions are not typical of their age. 

The rejection of ecclesiastical authority, which is the negative 
characteristic of the modern age, begins earlier than the positive 
characteristic, which is the acceptance of scientific authority. In the 
Italian renaissance, science played a very small part ; the opposition 
to the Church, in men's thoughts, was connected with antiquity, 
and looked still to the past, but to a more distant past than that of 
the early Church and the Middle Ages. The first serious irruption 
of science was the publication of the Copernican theory in 1543; 
but this theory did not become influential until it was taken up and 
improved by Kepler and Galileo in the seventeenth century. Then 
began the long fight between science and dogma, in which tradi- 
tionalists fought a losing battle against new knowledge. 

The authority of science, which is recognized by most philoso- 
phers of the modem epoch, is a very different thing from the 
authority of the Church, since it is intellectual, not governmental. 
No penalties fall upon those who reject it ; no prudential arguments 
influence those who accept it. It prevails solely by its intrinsic 
appeal to reason. It is, moreover, a piecemeal and partial authority ; 
it does not, like the body of Catholic dogma, lay down a complete 
system, covering human morality, human hopes, and the past and 
future history of the universe. It pronounces only on whatever, at 
the time, appears to have been scientifically ascertained, which is 
a small island in an ocean of nescience. There is yet another 
difference from ecclesiastical authority, which declares its pro- 
nouncements to be absolutely certain and eternally unalterable: 
the pronouncements of science are made tentatively, on a basis 
of probability, and are regarded as liable to modification. This 
produces a temper of mind very different from that of the medieval 
dogmatist. 

So far, I have been speaking of theoretical science, which is an 
attempt to understand the world. Practical science, which is an 
attempt to change the world, has been important from the first, 
and has continually increased in importance, until it han almost 
ousted theoretical science from men's thoughts. The practical 
importance of science was first recognized in connection with war; 
Galileo and Leonardo obtained government employment by their 
claim to improve artillery and the art of fortification. From their 

512 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 

time onwards, the part of the men of science in war has steadily 
grown greater. Their pan in developing machine production, and 
accustoming the population to the use, first of steam, then of 
electricity, came later, and did not begin to have important political 
effects until near the end of the nineteenth century. The triumph 
of science has been mainly due to its practical utility, and there 
has been an attempt to divorce this aspect from that of theory, thus 
making science more and more a technique, and less and less a 
doctrine as to the nature of the world. The penetration of this 
point of view to the philosophers is very recent. 

Emancipation from the authority of the Church led to the growth 
of individualism, even to the point of anarchy. Discipline, intel- 
lectual, moral, and political, was associated in the minds of the 
men of the Renaissance with the scholastic philosophy and eccle- 
siastical government. The Aristotelian logic of the Schoolmen was 
narrow, but afforded a training in a certain kind of accuracy. 
When this school of logic became unfashionable, it was not, at 
first, succeeded by something better, but only by an eclectic imita- 
tion of ancient models. Until the seventeenth century, there was 
nothing of importance in philosophy. The moral and political 
anarchy of fifteenth-century Italy was appalling, and gave rise to 
the doctrines of Machiavelli. At the same time, the freedom from 
mental shackles led to an astonishing display of genius in art and 
literature. But such a society is unstable. The Reformation and 
the Counter- Reformat ton, combined with the subjection of Italy 
to Spain, put an end to both the good and the bad of the Italian 
Renaissance. When the movement spread north of the Alps, it had 
not the same anarchic character. 

Modern philosophy, however, has retained, for the most part, 
an individualistic and subjective tendency. This is very marked in 
Descartes, who builds up all knowledge from the certainty of his 
own existence, and accepts clearness and distinctness (both sub- 
jective) as criteria of truth. It is not prominent in Spinoza, but 
reappears in Leibniz's windowless monads. Locke, whose tern- 
perament is thoroughly objective, is forced reluctantly into the 
subjective doctrine that knowledge is of the agreement or disagree- 
ment of ideas a view so repulsive to him that he escapes from 
it by violent inconsistencies. Berkeley, after abolishing matter, is 
only saved from complete subjectivism by a use of God which 
most subsequent philosophers have regarded as illegitimate. In 

513 R 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Hume, the empiricist philosophy culminated in a scepticism which 
none could refute and none could accept. Kant and Fichte were 
subjective in temperament as well as in doctrine; Hegel saved 
himself by means of the influence of Spinoza. Rousseau and the 
romantic movement extended subjectivity from theory of know- 
ledge to ethics and politics, and ended, logically, in complete 
anarchism such as that of Bakunin. This extreme of subjectivism 
is a form of madness. 

Meanwhile science as technique was building up in practical 
men a quite different outlook from any that was to be found among 
theoretical philosophers. Technique conferred a sense of power: 
man is now much less at the mercy of his environment than he was 
in former times. But the power conferred by technique is social, 
not individual; an average individual wrecked on a desert island 
could have achieved more in the seventeenth century than he could 
now. Scientific technique requires the co-operation of a large 
number of individuals organized under a single direction. Its ten- 
dency, therefore, is against anarchism and even individualism, 
since it demands a well-knit social structure. Unlike religion, it 
is ethically neutral: it assures men that they can perform wonders 
but does not tell them what wonders to perform. In this way it 
is incomplete. In practice, the purposes to which scientific skill 
will be devoted depend largely on chance. The men at the head 
of the vast organizations which it necessitates can, within limits, 
turn it this way or that as they please. The power impulse thus 
has a scope which it never had before. The philosophies that have 
been inspired by scientific technique are power philosophies, and 
tend to regard everything non-human as mere raw material. Ends 
are no longer considered; only the skilfulness of the process is 
valued This also is a form of madness. It is, in our day, the most 
dangerous form, and the one against which a sane philosophy 
should provide an antidote. 

The ancient world found an end to anarchy in the Roman 
Empire, but the Roman Empire was a brute fact, not an idea. The 
Catholic world sought an end to anarchy in the Church, which was 
an idea, but was never adequately embodied in fact. Neither the 
ancient nor the medieval Solution was satisfactory the one because 
it could not be idealized, the other because it could not be 
actualized. The modern world, at present, seems to be moving 
towards a solution like that of antiquity: a social order imposed 

5'4 



GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 



by force, representing the will of the powerful rather than the 
hopes of common men. The problem of a durable and satisfactory 
social order can only be solved by combining the solidity of the 
Roman Empire with the idealism of St. Augustine's City of God. 
To achieve this a new philosophy will be needed. 



5*5 



Chapter II 
THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 

f I HE modern as opposed to the medieval outlook began in 
I Italy with the movement called the Renaissance. At first, 

JL only a few individuals, notably Petrarch, had this outlook, 
but during the fifteenth century it spread to the great majority of 
cultivated Italians, both lay and clerical. In some respects, Italians 
of the Renaissance with the exception of Leonardo and a few 
others had not the respect for science which has characterized 
most important innovators since the seventeenth century; with 
this lack is associated their very partial emancipation from super- 
stition, especially in the form of astrology. Many of them had still 
the reverence for authority that medieval philosophers had had, 
but they substituted the authority of the ancients for that of the 
Church. This was, of course, a step towards emancipation, since 
the ancients disagreed with each other, and individual judgment 
was required to decide which of them to follow. But very few 
Italians of the fifteenth century would have dared to hold an 
opinion for which no authority could be found either in antiquity 
or in the teaching of the Church. 

To understand the Renaissance, it is necessary first to review 
briefly the political condition of Italy. After the death of Frederick 
II in 1250, Italy was, in the main, free from foreign interference 
until the French king Charles VIII invaded the country in 1494. 
There were in Italy five important States: Milan, Venice, Florence, 
the Papal Domain, and Naples; in addition to these there were a 
number of small principalities, which varied in their alliance with 
or subjection to some one of the larger States. Until 1378, Genoa 
rivalled Venice in commerce and naval power, but after that year 
Genoa became subject to Milanese suzerainty. 

Milan, which led the resistance to feudalism in the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries, fell, after the final defeat of the Hohenstaufen, 
under the dominion of the Visconti, an able family whose power 
was plutocratic, not feudal. They ruled for 170 years, from 1277 
to 1447 ; then, after three years of restored republican government, 
a new family, that of the Sforza, connected with the Visconti, 
acquired the government, and took the title of Dukes of Milan. 



THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 

From 1494 to 1535, Milan was a battle-ground between the French 
and the Spaniards; the Sforza allied themselves sometimes with 
one side, sometimes with the other. During this period they were 
sometimes in exile, sometimes in nominal control. Finally, in 1535, 
Milan was annexed by the Emperor Charles V. 

The Republic of Venice stands somewhat outside Italian politics, 
especially in the earlier centuries of its greatness. It had never been 
conquered by the barbarians, and at first regarded itself as subject 
to the Eastern emperors. This tradition, combined with the fact 
that its trade was with the East, gave it an independence of Rome, 
which still persisted down to the time of the Council of Trent 
(1545), of which the Venetian Paolo Sarpi wrote a very anti-papal 
history. We have seen how, at the time of the fourth Crusade, 
Venice insisted upon the conquest of Constantinople. This im- 
proved Venetian trade, which, conversely, suffered by the Turkish 
conquest of Constantinople in 1453. For various reasons, partly 
connected with food supply, the Venetians found it necessary, 
during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, to acquire consider- 
able territory on the mainland of Italy; this roused enmities, and 
led finally, in 1509, to the formation of the League of Cambrai, 
a combination of powerful States by which Venice was defeated. 
It might have been possible to recover from this misfortune, but 
not from Vasco da G a ma's discovery of the Cape route to India 
(1497-8). This, added to the power of the Turks, ruined Venice, 
which, however, lingered on until deprived of independence by 
Napoleon. 

The constitution of Venice, which had originally been demo- 
cratic, became gradually less so, and was, after 1297, a close 
oligarchy. The basis of political power was the Great Council, 
membership of which, after that date, was hereditary, and was 
confined to the leading families. Executive power belonged to the 
Council of Ten, which was elected by the Great Council. The 
Doge, the ceremonial head of the State, was elected for life; his 
nominal powers were very restricted, but in practice his influence 
was usually decisive. Venetian diplomacy was considered exceed- 
ingly astute, and the reports of Venetian ambassadors were 
remarkably penetrating. Since Ranke, historians have used them 
as among the best sources for knowledge of the events with which 
they deal. 

Florence was the most civilized city in the world, and the chief 

5'7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

source of the Renaissance. Almost all the great names in literature, 
and the earlier as well as some of the later of the great names in 
art, are connected with Florence ; but for the present we are con- 
cerned with politics rather than culture. In the thirteenth century, 
there were three conflicting classes in Florence: the nobles, the 
rich merchants, and the small men. The nobles, in the main, were 
Ghibelline, the other two classes Guelf. The Ghibellines were 
finally defeated in 1266, and during the fourteenth century the 
party of the small men got the better of the rich merchants. The 
conflict, however, led not to a stable democracy, but to the gradual 
growth of what the Greeks would have called a "tyranny." The 
Medici family, who ultimately became the rulers of Florence, 
began as political bosses on the democratic side. Cosimo dei Medici 
(1389-1464), the first of the family to achieve clear pre-eminence, 
still had no official position; his power depended upon skill in 
manipulating elections. He was astute, conciliatory when possible, 
ruthless when necessary. He was succeeded, after a short interval, 
by his grandson Lorenzo the Magnificent, who held power from 
1469 till his death in 1492. Both these men owed their position 
to their wealth, which they had acquired mainly in commerce, but 
also in mining and other industries. They understood how to make 
Florence rich, as well as themselves, and under them the city 
prospered. 

Lorenzo's son Pietro lacked his father's merits, and was expelled 
in 1494. Then followed the four years of Savonarola's influence, 
when a kind of Puritan revival turned men against gaiety and 
luxury, away from free-thought and towards the piety supposed 
to have characterized a simpler age. In the end, however, mainly 
for political reasons, Savonarola's enemies triumphed, he was 
executed and his body was burnt (1498). The Republic, demo- 
cratic in intention but plutocratic in fact, survived till 1512, when 
the Medici were restored. A son of Lorenzo, who had become a 
cardinal at the age of fourteen, was elected Pope in 1513, and took 
the title of Leo X. The Medici family, under the title of Grand 
Dukes of Tuscany, governed Florence until 1737; but Florence 
meanwhile, like the rest of Italy, had become poor and unim- 
portant. 

The temporal power of the Pope, which owed its origin to 
Pepin and the forged Donation of Constantinc, increased greatly 
during the Renaissance; but the methods employed by the popes 



THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 

to this end robbed the papacy of spiritual authority. The conciliar 
movement, which came to grief in the conflict between the Council 
of Basel and Pope Eugenius IV (1431-47), represented the most 
earnest elements in the Church; what was perhaps even more 
important, it represented ecclesiastical opinion north of the Alps. 
The victory of the popes was the victory of Italy, and (in a lesser 
degree) of Spain. Italian civilization, in the latter half of the 
fifteenth century, was totally unlike that of northern countries, 
which remained medieval. The Italians were in earnest about 
culture, but not about morals and religion ; even in the minds of 
ecclesiastics, elegant latinity would cover a multitude of sins. 
Nicholas V (1447-55), the first humanist Pope, gave papal offices 
to scholars whose learning he respected, regardless of other con- 
siderations; Lorenzo Valla, an Epicurean, and the man who proved 
the Donation of Constantine to be a forgery, who ridiculed the 
style of the Vulgate and accused St. Augustine of heresy, was made 
apostolic secretary. This policy of encouraging humanism rather 
than piety or orthodoxy continued until the sack of Rome in 



Encouragement of humanism, though it shocked the earnest 
North, might, from our point of view, be reckoned a virtue; but 
the warlike policy and immoral life of some of the popes could 
not be defended from any point of view except that of naked power 
politics. Alexander VI (1492-1503) devoted his life as Pope to the 
aggrandizement of himself and his family. He had two sons, the 
Duke of Gandia and Caesar Borgia, of whom he greatly preferred 
the former. The duke, however, was murdered, probably by his 
brother; the Pope's dynastic ambitions therefore had to be con- 
centrated on Caesar. Together they conquered the Romagna and 
Ancona, which were intended to form a principality for Caesar; 
but when the Pope died Caesar was very ill, and therefore could 
not act promptly. Their conquests consequently reverted to the 
patrimony of St. Peter. The wickedness of these two men soon 
became legendary, and it is difficult to disentangle truth from 
falsehood as regards the innumerable murders of which they are 
accused. There can be no doubt, however, that they carried the 
arts of perfidy further than they had 'ever been carried before. 
Julius II (1503-13), who succeeded Alexander VI, was not remark- 
able for piety, but gave less occasion for scandal than his pre- 
decessor. He continued the process of enlarging the papal domain ; 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as a soldier he had merit, but not as the Head of the Christian 
Church. The Reformation, which began under his successor Leo X 
(1513-21), was the natural outcome of the pagan policy of the 
Renaissance popes. 

The southern extremity of Italy was occupied by the Kingdom 
of Naples, with which, at most times, Sicily was united. Naples and 
Sicily had been the especial personal kingdom of the Emperor 
Frederick II; he had introduced an absolute monarchy on the 
Mohammedan model, enlightened but despotic, and allowing no 
power to the feudal nobility. After his death in 1250, Naples and 
Sicily went to his natural son Manfred, who, however, inherited 
the implacable hostility of the Church, and was ousted by the 
French in 1266. The French made themselves unpopular, and 
were massacred in the "Sicilian Vespers" (1282), after which the 
kingdom belonged to Peter III of Aragon and his heirs. After 
various complications, leading to the temporary separation of 
Naples and Sicily, they were reunited in 1443 under Alphonso 
the Magnanimous, a distinguished patron of letters. From 1495 
onwards, three French kings tried to conquer Naples, but in the 
end the kingdom was acquired by Ferdinand of Aragon (1502). 
Charles VIII, Louis XII, and Francis I, kings of France, all had 
claims (not very good in law) on Milan and Naples; all invaded 
Italy with temporary success, but all were ultimately defeated by 
the Spaniards. The victory of Spain and the Counter- Reformation 
put an end to the Italian Renaissance. Pope Clement VII being 
an obstacle to the Counter- Reformation, and, as a Medici, a friend 
of France, Charles V, in 1527, caused Rome to be sacked by a 
largely Protestant army. .After this, the popes became religious, 
and the Italian Renaissance was at an end. 

The game of power politics in Italy was unbelievably complex. 
The minor princes, mostly self-made tyrants, allied themselves 
now with one of the larger States, now with another; if they 
played the game unwisely, they were exterminated. There were 
constant wars, but until the coming of the French in 1494 they 
were almost bloodless: the soldiers were mercenaries, who were 
anxious to minimize their vocational risks. These purely Italian 
wars did not interfere much with trade, or prevent the country 
from increasing in wealth. There was much statecraft, but no 
wiae statesmanship; when the French came, the country found 
ittelf practically defenceless. French troops shocked the Italians 

520 



THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 

by actually killing people in battle. The wars between French and 
Spaniards which ensued were serious wars, bringing suffering and 
impoverishment. But the Italian States went on intriguing against 
each other, invoking the aid of France or Spain in their internal 
quarrels, without any feeling for national unity. In the end, all 
were ruined. It must be said that Italy would inevitably have lost 
its importance, owing to the discovery of America and the Cape 
route to the East; but the collapse could have been less catas- 
trophic, and less destructive of the quality of Italian civilization. 

The Renaissance was not a period of great achievement in 
philosophy, but it did certain things which were essential pre- 
liminaries to the greatness of the seventeenth century. In the first 
place, it broke down the rigid scholastic system, which had become 
an intellectual strait jacket. It revived the study of Plato, and 
thereby demanded at least so much independent thought as was 
required for choosing between him and Aristotle. In regard to 
both, it promoted a genuine and first-hand knowledge, free from 
the glosses of Xeoplatonists and Arabic commentators. More 
important still, it encouraged the habit of regarding intellectual 
activity as a delightful social adventure, not a cloistered meditation 
aiming at the preservation of a predetermined orthodoxy. 

The substitution of Plato for the scholastic Aristotle was has- 
tened by contact with Byzantine scholarship. Already at the Coun- 
cil of Ferrara (1438), which nominally reunited the Eastern and 
Western Churches, there was a debate in which the Byzantines 
maintained the superiority of Plato to Aristotle. Gemistus Pletho, 
an ardent Greek Platonist of doubtful orthodoxy, did much to 
promote Platonism in Italy ; so did Bessarion, a Greek who became 
a cardinal. Cosirno and Lorenzo dei Medici were both addicted 
to Plato; Cosimo founded and Lorenzo continued the Florentine 
Academy, which was largely devoted to the study of Plato. Cosimo 
died listening to one of Plato's dialogues. The humanists of the 
time, however, were too busy acquiring knowledge of antiquity to 
be able to produce anything original in philosophy. 

The Renaissance was not a popular movement; it was a move- 
ment of a small number of scholars and artists, encouraged by 
liberal patrons, especially the Medici artd the humanist popes. But 
for these patrons, it might have had very much less success. 
Petrarch and Boccaccio, in the fourteenth century, belong men- 
tally to the Renaissance, but owing to the different political con- 

521 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

ditions of their time their immediate influence was less than that 
of the fifteenth-century humanists. 

The attitude of Renaissance scholars to the Church is difficult 
to characterize simply. Some were avowed free-thinkers, though 
even these usually received extreme unction, making peace with 
the Church when they felt death approaching. Most of them were 
impressed by the wickedness of contemporary popes, but were 
nevertheless glad to be employed by them. Guicciardini the his- 
torian wrote in 1529: 

"No man is more disgusted than I am with the ambition, the 
avarice, and the profligacy of the priests, not only because each 
of these vices is hateful in itself, but because each and all of them 
are most unbecoming in those who declare themselves to be men 
in special relations with God, and also because they are vices so 
opposed to one another, that they can only co-exist in very sin- 
gular natures. Nevertheless, my position at the Court of several 
popes forced me to desire their greatness, for the sake of my own 
interest. But, had it not been for this, I should have loved Martin 
Luther as myself, not in order to free myself from the laws which 
Christianity, as generally understood and explained, lays upon us, 
but in order to see this swarm of scoundrels put back into their 
proper place, so that they may be forced to live either without 
vices or without power." 1 

This is delightfully frank, and shows clearly why the humanists 
could not inaugurate a reformation. Moreover, most of them saw 
no half-way house between orthodoxy and free-thought; such a 
position as Luther's was impossible for them, because they no 
longer had the medieval feeling for the subtleties of theology. 
Masuccio, after describing the wickedness of monks and nuns and 
friars, says; "The best punishment for them would be for God 
to abolish purgatory; they would then receive no more alms, and 
would be forced to go back to their spades." 2 But it does not 
occur to him, as to Luther, to deny purgatory, while retaining 
most of the Catholic faith. 

The wealth of Rome depended only in small part upon the 
revenues obtained from the papal dominions; in the main, it was 
a tribute, drawn from the whole Catholic world, by means of a 
theological system which maintained that the popes held the keys 

1 Quoted from Burckhardt, Renaissance in Italy, part iv, chap. ii. 
Ibid. 



THE ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 

of heaven. An Italian who effectively questioned this system risked 
the impoverishment of Italy, and the loss of the position in the 
Western world. Consequently Italian unorthodoxy, in the Renais- 
sance, was purely intellectual, and did not lead to schism, or to 
any attempt to create a popular movement away from the Church. 
The only exception, and that a very partial one, was Savonarola, 
who belonged mentally to the Middle Ages. 

Most of the humanists retained such superstitious beliefs as had 
found support in antiquity. Magic and witchcraft might be wicked, 
but were not thought impossible. Innocent VIII, in 1484, issued 
a bull against witchcraft, which led to an appalling persecution 
of witches in Germany and elsewhere. Astrology was prized 
especially by freethinkers; it acquired a vogue which it had not 
had since ancient times. The first effect of emancipation from the 
Church was not to make men think rationally, but to open their 
minds to every sort of antique nonsense. 

Morally, the first effect of emancipation w$s equally disastrous. 
The old moral rules ceased to be respected ; most of the rulers of 
States had acquired their position by treachery, and retained it 
by ruthless cruelty. When cardinals were invited to dine at the 
coronation of a pope, they brought their own wine and their own 
cup-bearer, for fear of poison. 1 Except Savonarola, hardly any 
Italian of the period risked anything for a public object. The evils 
of papal corruption were obvious, but nothing was done about 
them. The desirability of Italian unity was evident, but the rulers 
were incapable of combination. The danger of foreign domination 
was imminent, yet every Italian ruler was prepared to invoke the 
aid of any foreign power, even the Turk, in any dispute with any 
other Italian ruler. I cannot think of any crime, except the des- 
truction of ancient manuscripts, of which the men of the Renais- 
sance were not frequently guilty. 

Outside the sphere of morals, the Renaissance had great merits. 
In architecture, painting, and poetry, it has remained renowned. 
It produced very great men, such as Leonardo, Michelangelo, and 
Machiavelli. It liberated educated men from the narrowness of 
medieval culture, and, even while still a slave to the worship of 
antiquity, it made scholars aware that *a variety of opinions had 
been held by reputable authorities on almost every subject. By 
reviving the knowledge of the Greek world, it created a mental 
1 Burckhardt, op. cit. t part vi, chap. i. 

5 2 3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

atmosphere in which it was again possible to rival Hellenic achieve- 
ments, and in which individual genius could flourish with a free- 
dom unknown since the time of Alexander. The political conditions 
of the Renaissance favoured individual development, but were 
unstable; the instability and the individualism were closely con- 
nected, as in ancient Greece. A stable social system is necessary, 
but every stable system hitherto devised has hampered the deve- 
lopment of exceptional artistic or intellectual merit. How much 
murder and anarchy are we prepared to endure for the sake of 
great achievements such as those of the Renaissance ? In the past, 
a great deal; in our own time, much less. No solution of this 
problem has hitherto been found, although increase of social 
organization is making it continually more important. 



5*4 



Chapter III 
MACHIAVELLI 

E IHE Renaissance, though it produced no important theo- 
I retical philosopher, produced one man of supreme 
JL eminence in political philosophy: Niccol6 Machiavelli. It 
is the custom to be shocked by him, and he certainly is sometimes 
shocking. But many other men would be equally so if they were 
equally free from humbug. His political philosophy is scientific 
and empirical, based upon his own experience of affairs, concerned 
to set forth the means to assigned ends, regardless of the question 
whether the ends are to be considered good or bad. When, on 
occasion, he allows himself to mention the ends that he desires, 
they are such as we can all applaud. Much of the conventional 
obloquy that attaches to his name is due to the indignation of 
hypocrites who hate the frank avowal of evil-doing. There remains, 
it is true, a good deal that genuinely demands criticism, but in this 
he is an expression of his age. Such intellectual honesty about 
political dishonesty would have been hardly possible at any other 
time or in any other country, except perhaps in Greece among 
men who owed their theoretical education to the sophists and their 
practical training to the wars of petty states which, in classical 
Greece as in Renaissance Italy, were the political accompaniment 
of individual genius. 

Machiavelli (1467-1527) was a Florentine, whose father, a law- 
yer, was neither rich nor poor. When he was in his twenties, 
Savonarola dominated Florence; his miserable end evidently made 
a great impression on Machiavelli, for he remarks that "all armed 
prophets have conquered and unarmed ones failed," proceeding 
to give Savonarola as an instance of the latter class. On the other 
side he mentions Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus. It is 
typical of the Renaissance that Christ is not mentioned. 

Immediately after Savonarola's execution, Machiavelli obtained 
a minor post in the Florentine government (1498). He remained 
in its service, at times on important diplomatic missions, until 
the restoration of the Medici in 1512 ; tLen, having always opposed 
them, he was arrested, but acquitted, and allowed to live in retire- 
ment in the country near Florence. He became an author for want 

525 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

oi other occupation. His most famous work, The Prince^ was 
written in 1513, and dedicated to Lorenzo the Second, since he 
hoped (vainly, as it proved) to win the favour of the Medici, 
Its tone is perhaps partly due to this practical purpose ; his longer 
work, the Discourses^ which he was writing at the same time, is 
markedly more republican and more liberal. He says at the begin- 
ning of The Prince that he will not speak of republics in this book, 
since he has dealt with them elsewhere. Those who do not read 
also the Discourses are likely to get a very one-sided view of his 
doctrine. 

Having failed to conciliate the Medici, Machiavelli was com- 
pelled to go on writing. He lived in retirement until the year of 
his death, which was that of the sack of Rome by the troops of 
Charles V. This year may be reckoned also that in which the 
Italian Renaissance died. 

The Prince is concerned to discover, from history and from con- 
temporary events, how principalities are won, how they are held, 
and how they are lost. Fifteenth-century Italy afforded a multitude 
of examples, both great and small. Few rulers were legitimate; 
even the popes, in many cases, secured election by corrupt means. 
The rules for achieving success were not quite the same as they 
became when times grew more settled, for no one was shocked by 
cruelties and treacheries which would have disqualified a man in 
the eighteenth or the nineteenth century. Perhaps our age, again, 
can better appreciate Machiavelli, for some of the most notable 
successes of our time have been achieved by methods as base as 
any employed in Renaissance Italy. He would have applauded, 
as an artistic connoisseur in statecraft, Hitler's Reichstag fire, his 
purge of the party in 1934, and his breach of faith after Munich. 
Caesar Borgia, son of Alexander VI, comes in for high praise. 
His problem was a difficult one: first, by the death of his brother, 
to become the sole beneficiary of his father's dynastic ambition ; 
second, to conquer by force of arms, in the name of the Pope, 
territories which should, after Alexander's death, belong to him- 
self and not to the Papal States; third, to manipulate the College 
of Cardinals so that the next Pope should be his friend. He pursued 
this difficult end with great skill; from his practice, Machiavellt 
says, a new prince should derive precepts. Caesar failed, it is true, 
but only "by the extraordinary malignity of fortune." It happened 
that, when his father died, he also was dangerously ill; by the 

526 



MACH1AVELLI 

time he recovered, his enemies had organized their forces, and his 
bitterest opponent had been elected Pope. On the day of this 
election, Caesar told Machiavelli that he had provided for every- 
thing, "except that he had never thought that at his father's death 
he would be dying himself." 

Machiavelli, who was intimately acquainted with his villainies, 
sums up thus: "Reviewing thus all the actions of the duke [Caesar], 
I find nothing to blame, on the contrary, I feel bound, as I have 
done, to hold him as an example to be imitated by all who by 
fortune and with the arms of others have risen to power." 

There is an interesting chapter "Of Ecclesiastical Principalities," 
which, in view of what is said in the Discourses, evidently conceals 
part of Machiavelli 's thought. The reason for concealment was, 
no doubt, that The Prince was designed to please the Medici, and 
that, when it was written, a Medici had just become Pope (Leo X). 
In regard to ecclesiastical principalities, he says in The Prince, the 
only difficulty is to acquire them, for, when acquired, they are 
defended by ancient religious customs, which keep their princes 
in power no matter how they behave. Their princes do not need 
armies (so he says), because "they are upheld by higher causes 
which the human mind cannot attain to." They are "exalted and 
maintained by God," and "it would be the work of a presumptuous 
and foolish man to discuss them." Nevertheless, he continues, it 
is permissible to inquire by what means Alexander VI so greatly 
increased the temporal power of the Pope. 

The discussion of the papal powers in the Discourses is longer 
and more sincere. Here he begins by placing eminent men in an 
ethical hierarchy. The best, he says, are the founders of religions; 
then come the founders of monarchies or republics; then literary 
men. These are good, but destroyers of religions, subverters of 
republics or kingdoms, and enemies of virtue or of letters, are 
bad. Those who establish tyrannies are wicked, including Julius 
Caesar ; on the other hand, Brutus was good. (The contrast between 
this view and Dante's shows the effect of classical literature.) Me 
holds that religion should have a prominent place in the State, not 
on the ground of its truth, but as a social cement: the Romans 
were right to pretend to believe in auguries, and to punish those 
who disregarded them. His criticisms of the Church in his day 
are two: that by its evil conduct it has undermined religious belief, 
and that the temporal power of the popes, with the policy that it 

5*7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

inspires, prevents the unification of Italy. These criticisms are 
expressed with great vigour. "The nearer people are to the Church 
of Rome, which is the head of our religion, the less religious are 
they. . . . Her ruin and chastisement is near at hand. . . . We Italians 
owe to the Church of Rome and to her priests our having become 
irreligious and bad; but we owe her a still greater debt, and one 
that will be the cause of our ruin, namely that the Church has 
kept and still keeps our country divided." 1 

In view of such passages, it must be supposed that Machiavelli's 
admiration of Caesar Borgia was only for his skill, not for his pur- 
poses. Admiration of skill, and of the actions that lead to fame, was 
very great at the time of the Renaissance. This kind of feeling has, 
of course, always existed ; many of Napoleon's enemies enthusiasti- 
cally admired him as a military strategist. But in the Italy of 
Machiavelli's time the quasi-artistic admiration of dexterity was 
much greater than in earlier or later centuries. It would be a 
mistake to try to reconcile it with the arger political aims which 
Machiavelli considered important; the two things, love of skill 
and patriotic desire for Italian unity, existed side by side in his 
mind, and were not in any degree synthesized. Thus he can praise 
Caesar Borgia for his cleverness, and blame him for keeping Italy 
disrupted. The perfect character, one must suppose, would be, in 
his opinion, a man as clever and unscrupulous as Caesar Borgia 
where means are concerned, but aiming at a different end. The 
Prince ends with an eloquent appeal to the Medici to liberate Italy 
from the "barbarians" (i.e. the French and Spaniards), whose 
domination "stinks." He would not expect such a work to be 
undertaken from unselfish motives, but from love of power, and 
still more of fame. 

The Prince is very explicit in repudiating received morality where 
the conduct of rulers is concerned. A ruler will perish if he is 
always good ; he must be as cunning as a fox and as fierce as a lion. 
There is a chapter (XVIII) entitled: "In What Way Princes Must 
Keep Faith." We learn that they should keep faith when it pays 
to do so, but not otherwise. A prince must on occasion be faithless 

"But it is necessary to be able to disguise this character well, and 

to be a great feigner and dissembler; and men are so simple and 

so ready to obey present necessities, that one who deceives will 

always find those who allow themselves to be deceived. I will men- 

* This remained true until 1870. 

5*8 



MACHIAVELLI 

tion only one modern instance. Alexander VI did nothing else but 
deceive men, he thought of nothing else, and found the occasion 
for it; no man was ever more able to give assurances, or affirmed 
things with stronger oaths, and no man observed them less; how* 
ever, he always succeeded in his deceptions, as he knew well this 
aspect of things. It is not necessary therefore for a prince to have 
all the above-named qualities [the conventional virtues], but it is 
very necessary to seem to have them." . 

He goes on to say that, above all, a prince should seem to be 
religious. 

The tone of the Discourses, which are nominally a commentary 
on Livy, is very different. There are whole chapters which seem 
almost as if they had been written by Montesquieu ; most of the 
book could have been read with approval by an eighteenth-century 
liberal. The doctrine of checks and balances is set forth explicitly. 
Princes, nobles, and people should all have a part in the Con- 
stitution; "then these three powers will keep each other recipro- 
cally in check." The constitution of Sparta, as established by 
Lycurgus, was the best, because it embodied the most perfect 
balance ; that of Solon was too democratic, and therefore led to the 
tyranny of Peisistratus. The Roman republican constitution was 
good, owing to the conflict of Senate and people. 

The word "liberty" is used throughout as denoting something 
precious, though what it denotes is not very clear. This, of course, 
comes from antiquity, and was passed on to the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries. Tuscany has preserved its liberties, because 
it contains no castles or gentlemen. ("Gentlemen" is of course a 
mistranslation, but a pleasing one.) It seems to be recognized that 
political liberty requires a certain kind of personal virtue in the 
citizens. In Germany alone, we are told, probity and religion are 
still common, and therefore in Germany there are many republics. 
In genera], the people are wiser and more constant than princes, 
although Livy and most other writers maintain the opposite. It is 
not without good reason that it is said, "the voice of the people 
is the voice of God." 

It is interesting to observe how the political thought of the 
Greeks and Romans, in their republican days, acquired an actuality 
in the fifteenth century which it had not had in Greece since 
Alexander or in Rome since Augustus. The Neoplatonists, the 
Arabs, and the Schoolmen took a passionate interest in the meta- 

5*9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

physics of Plato and Aristotle, but none at all in their political 
writings, because the political systems of the age of City States 
had completely disappeared. The growth of City States in Italy 
synchronized with the revival of learning, and made it possible 
for humanists to profit by the political theories of republican 
Greeks and Romans. The love of "liberty," and the theory of 
checks and balances, came to the Renaissance from antiquity, and 
to modern times largely from the Renaissance, though also directly 
from antiquity. This aspect of Machiavelli is at least as important 
as the more famous "immoral" doctrines of The Prince. 

It is to be noted that Machiavelli never bases any political 
argument on Christian or biblical grounds. Medieval writers had 
a conception of "legitimate" power, which was that of the Pope 
and the Emperor, or derived from them. Northern writers, even 
so late as Locke, argue as to what happened in the Garden of Eden, 
and think that they can thence derive proofs that certain kinds of 
power are "legitimate." In Machiavelli there is no such conception. 
Power is for those who have the skill to seize it in a free com- 
petition. His preference for popular government is not derived 
from any idea of "rights," but from the observation that popular 
governments are less cruel, unscrupulous, and inconstant than 
tyrannies. 

Let us try to make a synthesis (which Machiavelli himself did 
not make) of the "moral" and "immoral" parts of his doctrine. 
In what follows, I am expressing not my own opinions, but 
opinions which are explicitly or implicitly his. 

There are certain political goods, of which three are specially 
important: national independence, security, and a well-ordered 
constitution. The best constitution is one which apportions legal 
rights among prince, nobles, and people in proportion to their real 
power, for under such a constitution successful revolutions are 
difficult and therefore stability is possible; but for considerations 
of stability, it would be wise to give more power to the people. 
So far as regards ends. 

But there is also, in politics, the question of means. It is futile 
to pursue a political purpose by methods that are bound to fail ; 
if the end is held good, <we must choose means adequate to its 
achievement. The question of means can be treated in a purely 
scientific manner, without regard to the goodness or badness of the 
ends. "Success" means the achievement of your purpose, whatever 

530 



MACH1AVELL1 

it may be. If there is a science of success, it can be studied just as 
well in the successes of the wicked as in those of the good indeed 
better, since the examples of successful sinners are more numerous 
than those of successful saints. But the science, once established, 
will be just as useful to the saint as to the sinner. For the saint, if 
he concerns himself with politics, must wish, just as the sinner 
does, to achieve success. 

The question is ultimately one of power. To achieve a political 
end, power, of one kind or another, is necessary. This plain fact 
is concealed by slogans, such as "right will prevail'* or ''the triumph 
of evil is short-lived." If the side that you think right prevails, that 
is because it has superior power. It is true that power, often, 
depends upon opinion, and opinion upon propaganda; it is true, 
also, that it is an advantage in propaganda to seem more virtuous 
than your adversary, and that one way of seeming virtuous is to 
be virtuous. For this reason, it may sometimes happen that victory 
goes to the side which has the most of what the general public 
considers to be virtue. We must concede to Machiavelli that this 
was an important element in the growing power of the Church 
during the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, as well as in 
the success of the Reformation in the sixteenth century. But there 
are important limitations. In the first place, those who have seized 
power can, by controlling propaganda, cause their party to appear 
virtuous; no one, for example, could mention the sins of Alexander 
VI in a New York or Boston public school. In the second place, 
there are chaotic periods during which obvious knavery frequently 
succeeds; the period of Machiavelli was one of them. In such 
times, there tends to be a rapidly growing cynicism, which makes 
men forgive anything provided it pays. Even in such times, as 
Machiavelli himself says, it is desirable to present an appearance 
of virtue before the ignorant public. 

This question can be carried a step further. Machiavelli is of 
opinion that civilized men are almost certain to be unscrupulous 
egoists. If a man wished nowadays to establish a republic, he 
says, he would find it easier with mountaineers than with the men 
of a large city, since the latter would be already corrupted. 1 If a 
man is an unscrupulous egoist, his wisest line of conduct will 

1 It is curious to find this anticipation of Rousseau. It would be amus- 
ing, and not wholly false, to interpret Machiavelli as a disappointed 
romantic. 

S3 1 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

depend upon the population with which he has to operate. The 
Renaissance Church shocked everybody, but it was only north 
of the Alps that it shocked people enough to produce the Refor- 
mation. At the time when Luther began his revolt, the revenue of 
the papacy was probably larger than it would have been if Alexan- 
der VI and Julius II had been more virtuous, and if this is true, 
it is so because of the cynicism of Renaissance Italy. It follows that 
politicians will behave better when they depend upon a virtuous 
population than when they depend upon one which is indifferent 
to moral considerations; they will also behave better in a com- 
munity in which their crimes, if any, can be made widely known, 
than in one in which there is a strict censorship under their control. 
A certain amount can, of course, always be achieved by hypocrisy, 
but the amount can be much diminished by suitable institutions. 

Machiavelli's political thinking, like that of most of the ancients, 
is in one respect somewhat shallow. He is occupied with great law- 
givers, such as Lycurgus and Solon, who are supposed to create 
a community all in one piece, with little regard to what has gone 
before. The conception of a community as an organic growth, 
which the statesmen can only affect to a limited extent, is in the 
main modern, and has been greatly strengthened by the theory 
of evolution. This conception is not to be found in Machiavelli 
any more than in Plato. 

It might, however, be maintained that the evolutionary view of 
society, though true in the past, is no longer applicable, but must, 
for the present and the future, be replaced by a much more 
mechanistic view. In Russia and Germany new societies have been 
created, in much the same way as the mythical Lycurgus was 
supposed to have created the Spartan polity. The ancient lawgiver 
was a benevolent myth ; the modern lawgiver is a terrifying reality. 
The world has become more like that of Machiavelli than it was, 
and the modern man who hopes to refute his philosophy must 
think more deeply than seemed necessary in the nineteenth century. 



532 



Chapter IV 
ERASMUS AND MORE 

IN northern countries the Renaissance began later than in Italy, 
and soon became entangled with the Reformation. But there 
was a brief period, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, 
during which the new learning was being vigorously disseminated 
in France, England, and Germany, without having become in- 
volved in theological controversy. This northern Renaissance was 
in many ways very different from that of Italy. It was not anarchic 
or amoral; on the contrary, it was associated with piety and public 
virtue. It was much interested in applying standards of scholarship 
to the Bible, and in obtaining a more accurate text than that of the 
Vulgate. It was less brilliant and more solid than its Italian pro- 
genitor, less concerned with personal display of learning, and more 
anxious to spread learning as widely as possible. 

Two men, Erasmus and Sir Thomas More, will serve as exem- 
plars of the northern Renaissance. They were close friends, and 
had much in common. Both were learned, though More less so 
than Erasmus ; both despised the scholastic philosophy ; both aimed 
at ecclesiastical reform from within, but deplored the Protestant 
schism when it came; both were witty, humorous, and highly 
skilled writers. Before Luther's revolt, they were leaders of thought, 
but after it the world was too violent, on both sides, for men of 
their type. More suffered martyrdom, and Erasmus sank into 
ineffectiveness. 

Neither Erasmus nor More was a philosopher in the strict sense 
of the word. My reason for speaking of them is that they illustrate 
the temper of a pre-revolutionary age, when there is a widespread 
demand for moderate reform, and timid men have not yet been 
frightened into reaction by extremists. They exemplify also the 
dislike of everything systematic in theology or philosophy which 
characterized the reactions against scholasticism. 

Erasmus (1466-1536) was born at Rotterdam. 1 He was illegiti- 
mate, and invented a romantically untrae account of the circum- 
stances of his birth. In fact, his father was a priest, a man of 

1 As regards the life of Erasmus, I have mainly followed the excellent 
biography by Iluizinga. 

533 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

some learning, with a knowledge of Greek. His parents died before 
he was grown up, and his guardians (apparently because they had 
embezzled his money) cajoled him into becoming a monk at the 
monastery of Steyr, a step which he regretted all the rest of his life. 
One of his guardians was a schoolmaster, but knew less Latin than 
Erasmus already knew as a schoolboy; in reply to a Latin epistle 
from the boy, the schoolmaster wrote: "If you should write again 
so elegantly, please to add a commentary." 

In 1493, he became secretary to the bishop of Cambrai, who was 
Chancellor of the Order of the Golden Fleece. This gave him the 
opportunity to leave the monastery and travel, though not to Italy, 
as he had hoped. His knowledge of Greek was as yet very slight, 
but he was a highly accomplished Latinist ; he particularly admired 
Lorenzo Valla, on account of his book on the elegancies of the 
Latin language. He considered latinity quite compatible with true 
devotion, and instanced Augustine and Jerome forgetting, appa- 
rently, the dream in which Our Lord denounced the latter for 
reading Cicero. 

He was for a time at the University of Paris, but found nothing 
there that was of profit to himself. The university had had its great 
days, from the beginning of scholasticism to Gerson and the con- 
ciliar movement, but now the old disputes had become arid. 
Thomists and Scotists, who jointly were called the Ancients, dis- 
puted against Occamists, who were called the Terminists, or 
Moderns. At last, in 1482, they were reconciled, and made common 
cause against the humanists, who were making headway in Paris 
outside university circles. Erasmus hated the scholastics, whom he 
regarded as superannuated and antiquated. He mentioned in a 
letter that, as he wanted to obtain the doctor's degree, he tried 
to say nothing either graceful or witty. He did not really like any 
philosophy, not even Plato and Aristotle, though they, being 
ancients, had to be spoken of with respect. 

In 1499 he made his first visit to England, where he liked the 
fashion of kissing girls. In England he made friends with Colet and 
More, who encouraged him to undertake serious work rather than 
literary trifles. Colet lectured on the Bible without knowing Greek; 
Erasmus, feeling that he would like to do work on the Bible, con- 
sidered that a knowledge of Greek was essential. After leaving 
England at the beginning of 1500, he set to work to learn Greek, 
though he was too poor to afford a teacher ; by the autumn of 1502, 

534 



ERASMUS AND MORE 

he was proficient, and when in 1506 he went to Italy, he found 
that the Italians had nothing to teach him. He determined to edit 
St. Jerome, and to bring out a Greek Testament with a new Latin 
translation; both were achieved in 1516. The discovery of inac- 
curacies in the Vulgate was subsequently of use to the Protestants 
in controversy. He tried to learn Hebrew, but gave it up. 

The only book by Erasmus that is still read is The Praise of Folly. 
The conception of this book came to him in 1509, while he was 
crossing the Alps on the way from Italy to England. He wrote it 
quickly in London, at the house of Sir Thomas More, to whom it 
is dedicated, with a playful suggestion of appropriateness since 
"moros" means "fool." The book is spoken by Folly in her own 
person ; she sings her own praises with great gusto, and her text 
is enlivened still further with illustrations by Holbein. She covers 
all pans of human life, and all classes and professions. But for her, 
the human race would die out, for who can marry without folly? 
She counsels, as an antidote to wisdom, "taking a wife, a creature 
so harmless and silly, and yet so useful and convenient, as might 
mollify and make pliable the stiffness and morose humour of men." 
Who can be happy without flattery or without self-love? Yet such 
happiness is folly. The happiest men are those who are nearest the 
brutes and divest themselves of reason. The best happiness is that 
which is based on delusion, since it costs least: it is easier to 
imagine oneself a king than to make oneself a king in reality. 
Erasmus proceeds to make fun of national pride and of professional 
conceit : almost all professors of the arts and sciences are egregiously 
conceited, and derive their happiness from their conceit. 

There are passages where the satire gives way to invective, and 
Folly utters the serious opinions of Erasmus ; these are concerned 
with ecclesiastical abuses. Pardons and indulgences, by which 
priests "compute the time of each soul's residence in purgatory"; 
the worship of saints, even of the Virgin, "whose blind devotees 
think it manners to place the mother before the Son"; the disputes 
of theologians as to the Trinity and the Incarnation ; the doctrine 
of transubstantiation ; the scholastic sects; popes, cardinals, and 
bishops all are fiercely ridiculed. Particularly fierce is the attack 
on the monastic orders: they are "brainsick fools," who have very 
little religion in them, yet are "highly in love with themselves, and 
fond admirers of their own happiness/' They behave as if all 
religion consisted in minute punctilio: "The precise number of 

535 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

knots to the tying on of their sandals; what distinct colours their 
respective habits, and what stuff made of; how broad and long 
their girdles," and so on. "It will be pretty to hear their pleas 
before the great tribunal : one will brag how he mortified his carnal 
appetite by feeding only upon fish: another will urge that he spent 
most of his time on earth in the divine exercise of singing psalms: 
. . . another, that in threescore years he never so much as touched 
a piece of money, except he fingered it through a thick pair of 
gloves." But Christ will interrupt: "Woe unto you, scribes and 
pharisees, ... I left you but one precept, of loving one another, 
which I do not hear any one plead that he has faithfully dis- 
charged. 9 ' Yet on earth these men are feared, for they know many 
secrets from the confessional, and often blab them when they are 
drunk. 

Popes are not spared. They should imitate their Master by 
humility and poverty. "Their only weapons ought to be those of 
the Spirit ; and of these indeed they are mightily liberal, as of their 
interdicts, their suspensions, their denunciations, their aggrava- 
tions, their greater and lesser excommunications, and their roaring 
bulls, that fight whomever they are thundered against ; and these 
most holy fathers never issue them out more frequently than 
against those who, at the instigation of the devil, and not having 
the fear of God before their eyes, do feloniously and maliciously 
attempt to lessen and impair St. Peter's patrimony." 

It might be supposed, from such passages, that Erasmus would 
have welcomed the Reformation, but it proved otherwise. 

The book ends with the serious suggestion that true religion is 
a form of Folly. There are, throughout, two kinds of Folly, one 
praised ironically, the other seriously; the kind praised seriously 
is that which is displayed in Christian simplicity. This praise is 
of a piece with Erasmus's dislike of scholastic philosophy and of 
learned doctors whose Latin was unclassical. But it has also a 
deeper aspect. It is the first appearance in literature, so far as I 
know, of the view set forth in Rousseau's Savoyard Vicar, accord- 
ing to which true religion comes from the heart, not the head, and 
all elaborate theology is superfluous. This point of view has become 
increasingly common, anti is now pretty generally accepted among 
Protestants. It is, essentially, a rejection of Hellenic intellectualism 
by the sentimentalism of the North. 

Erasmus, on his second visit to England, remained for five years 

536 



ERASMUS AND MORE 

(1509-14), partly in London, partly at Cambridge. He had a con- 
siderable influence in stimulating English humanism. The educa- 
tion at English public schools remained, until recently, almost 
exactly what he would have wished: a thorough grounding in 
Greek and Latin, involving not only translation, but verse and 
prose composition. Science, although intellectually dominant since 
the seventeenth century, was thought unworthy the attention of 
a gentleman or a divine; Plato should be studied, but not the 
subjects which Plato thought worth studying. All this is in line 
with the influence of Erasmus. 

The men of the Renaissance had an immense curiosity; "these 
minds," says Huizinga, "never had their desired share of striking 
incidents, curious details, rarities and anomalies." But at first they 
sought these things, not in the world, but in old books. Erasmus 
was interested in the world, but could not digest it in the raw: it 
had to be dished up in Latin or Greek before he could assimilate 
it. Travellers' tales were discounted, but any marvel in Pliny was 
believed. Gradually, however, curiosity became transferred from 
books to the real world ; men became interested in the savages and 
strange animals that were actually discovered, rather than in those 
described by classical authors. Caliban comes from Montaigne, 
and Montaigne's cannibals come from travellers. "The anthropo- 
phagi and men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders" had 
been seen by Othello, not derived from antiquity. 

And so the curiosity of the Renaissance, from having been 
literary, gradually became scientific. Such a cataract of new facts 
overwhelmed men that they could, at first, only be swept along 
with the current. The old systems were evidently wrong; Aris- 
totle's physics and Ptolemy's astronomy and Galen's medicine 
could not be stretched to include the discoveries that had been 
made. Montaigne and Shakespeare are content with confusion: 
discovery is delightful, and system is its enemy. It was not till the 
seventeenth century that the system-building faculty caught up 
with the new knowledge of matters of fact. All this, however, has 
taken us far from Erasmus, to whom Columbus was less interesting 
than the Argonauts. 

Erasmus was incurably and unashamedly literary. He wrote a 
book, Enchiridion militis christiani, giving advice to illiterate sol- 
diers: they were to read the Bible, but also Plato, Ambrose, 
Jerome, and Augustine. He made a vast collection of Latin pro- 

537 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

verbs, to which, in later editions, he added many in Greek; his 
original purpose was to enable people to write Latin idiomatically. 
He wrote an immensely successful book of Colloquies, to teach 
people how to talk in Latin about every-day matters, such as a 
game of bowls. This was, perhaps, more useful than it seems now. 
Latin was the only international language, and students at the 
University of Paris came from all over Western Europe. It may 
have often happened that Latin was the only language in which 
two students could converse. 

After the Reformation, Erasmus lived first in Louvain, which 
maintained perfect Catholic orthodoxy, then in Basel, which 
became Protestant. Each side tried to enlist him, but for a long 
time in vain. He had, as we have seen, expressed himself strongly 
about ecclesiastical abuses and the wickedness of popes; in 1518, 
the very year of Luther's revolt, he published a satire, called Julius 
exclusus, describing the failure of Julius II to get to heaven. But 
Luther's violence repelled him, and he hated war. At last he came 
down on the Catholic side. In 1524 he wrote a work defending 
free will, which Luther, following and exaggerating Augustine, 
rejected. Luther replied savagely, and Erasmus was driven further 
into reaction. From this time until his death, he became increasingly 
unimportant. He had always been timid, and the times were no 
longer suited to timid people. For honest men, the only honourable 
alternatives were martyrdom or victory. His friend Sir Thomas 
More was compelled to choose martyrdom, and Erasmus com- 
mented: "Would More had never meddled with that dangerous 
business, and left the theological cause to the theologians. 1 ' 
Erasmus lived too long, into an age of new virtues and new 
vices heroism and intolerance neither of which he could 
acquire. 

Sir Thomas More (1478-1535) was, as a man, much more ad- 
mirable than Erasmus, but much less important as an influence. 
He was a humanist, but also a man of profound piety. At Oxford, 
he set to work to learn Greek, which was then unusual, and was 
thought to show a sympathy with Italian infidels. The authorities 
and his father objected, and he was removed from the university. 
Thereupon he was attracted to the Carthusians, practised extreme 
austerities, and contemplated joining the order. He was deterred 
from doing so, apparently by the influence of Erasmus, whom he 
first met at this time. His father was a lawyer, and he decided to 

538 



ERASMUS AND MORE 

follow his father's profession. In 1504 he was a Member of Parlia- 
ment, and led the opposition to Henry VH's demand for new 
taxes. In this he was successful, but the king was furious; he sent 
More's father to the Tower, releasing him, however, on payment 
of 100. On the king's death in 1509, More returned to the practice 
of the law, and won the favour of Henry VIII. He was knighted 
in 1514, and employed on various embassies. The king kept in- 
viting him to court, but More would not come; at last the king 
came uninvited to dine with him at his house in Chelsea. More 
had no illusions as to Henry VIII; when complimented on the 
king's favourable disposition, he replied: "If my head should win 
him a castle in France it should not fail to go." 

When Wolsey fell, the king appointed More chancellor in his 
stead. Contrary to the usual practice, he refused all gifts from 
litigants. He soon fell into disfavour, because the king was deter- 
mined to divorce Catherine of Aragon in order to marry Anne 
Bo ley n, and More was unalterably opposed to the divorce. He 
therefore resigned in 1532. His incorruptibility when in office is 
shown by the fact that after his resignation he had only 100 a 
year. In spite of his opinions, the king invited him to his wedding 
with Anne Boleyn, but More refused the invitation. In 1534, the 
king got Parliament to pass the Act of Supremacy, declaring him, 
not the Pope, the head of the Church of England. Under this act 
an Oath of Supremacy was exacted, which More refused to take; 
this was only misprision of treason, which did not involve the 
death penalty. It was proved, however, by very dubious testimony, 
that he had said Parliament could not make Henry head of the 
Church; on this evidence he was convicted of high treason, and 
beheaded. His property was given to Princess Elizabeth, who kept 
it to the day of her death. 

More is remembered almost solely on account of his Utopia 
(1518). Utopia is an island in the southern hemisphere, where 
everything is done in the best possible way. It has been visited 
accidentally by a sailor named Raphael Hythloday, who spent five 
years there, and only returned to Europe to make its wise institu- 
tions known. 

In Utopia, as in Plato's Republic, all things are held in common, 
for the public good cannot flourish where there is private property, 
and without communism there can be no equality. More, in the 
dialogue, objects that communism would make men idle, and 

539 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

destroy respect for magistrates; to this Raphael replies that no 
one would say this who had lived in Utopia. 

There are in Utopia fifty-four towns, all on the same plan, except 
that one is the capital. All the streets are twenty feet broad, and 
all the private houses are exactly alike, with one door onto the 
street and one onto the garden. There are no locks on the doors, 
and everyone may enter any house. The roofs are flat. Every 
tenth year people change houses apparently to prevent any feeling 
of ownership. In the country, there are farms, each containing 
not fewer than forty persons, including two bondmen ; each farm 
is under the rule of a master and mistress, who are old and wise. 
The chickens are not hatched by hens, but in incubators (which 
did not exist in More's time). All are dressed alike, except that 
there is a difference between the dress of men and women, and 
of married and unmarried. The fashions never change, and no 
difference is made between summer and winter clothing. At work, 
leather or skins are worn ; a suit will last seven years. When they 
stop work, they throw a woollen cloak over their working clothes. 
All these cloaks are alike, and are the natural colour of wool. Each 
family makes its own clothes. 

Everybody men and women alike works six hours a day, three 
before dinner and three after. All go to bed at eight, and sleep eight 
hours. In the early morning there are lectures, to which multitudes 
go, although they are not compulsory. After supper an hour is 
devoted to play. Six hours* work is enough, because there are no 
idlers and there is no useless work; with us, it is said, women, 
priests, rich people, servants, and beggars, mostly do nothing 
useful, and owing to the existence of the rich much labour is spent 
in producing unnecessary luxuries; all this is avoided in Utopia. 
Sometimes it is found that there is a surplus, and the magistrates 
proclaim a shorter working day for a time. 

Some men are elected to become men of learning, and are 
exempted from other work while they are found satisfactory. All 
who are concerned with government are chosen from the learned. 
The government is a representative democracy, with a system of 
indirect election; at the head is a prince who is elected for life, 
but can be deposed for tyranny. 

Family life is patriarchal; married sons live in their father's 
house, and are governed by him, unless he is in his dotage. If any 
family grows too large, the surplus children are moved into another 



ERASMUS AND MORE 

family. If a town grows too large, some of the inhabitants are 
moved into another town. If all the towns are too large, a new 
town is built on waste land. Nothing is said as to what is to be 
done when all the waste land is used up. All killing of beasts for food 
is done by bondmen, lest free citizens should learn cruelty. There 
are hospitals for the sick, which are so excellent that people who 
are ill prefer them. Eating at home is permitted, but most people 
eat in common halls. Here the "vile service" is done by bondmen, 
but the cooking is done by women and the waiting by the older 
children. Men sit at one bench, women at another; nursing 
mothers, with children under five, are in a separate parlour. All 
women nurse their own children. Children over five, if too young 
to be waiters, "stand by with marvellous silence," while their 
elders eat ; they have no separate dinner, but must be content with 
such scraps as are given them from the table. 

As for marriage, both men and women are sharply punished if 
not virgin when they marry ; and fhe householder of any house in 
which misconduct has occurred is liable to incur infamy for care- 
lessness. Before marriage, bride and groom see each other naked ; 
no one would buy a horse without first taking off the saddle and 
bridle, and similar considerations should apply in marriage. There 
is divorce for adultery or "intolerable waywardness" of either 
party, but the guilty party cannot remarry. Sometimes divorce 
is granted solely because both parties desire it. Breakers of wedlock 
are punished by bondage. 

There is foreign trade, chiefly for the purpose of getting iron, 
of which there is none in the island. Trade is used also for purposes 
connected with war. The Utopians think nothing of martial glory, 
though all learn how to fight, women as well as men. They resort 
to war for three purposes: to defend their own territory when 
invaded ; to deliver the territory of an ally from invaders ; and to 
free an oppressed nation from tyranny. But whenever they can, 
they get mercenaries to fight their wars for them. They aim at 
getting other nations into their debt, and letting them work off 
the debt by supplying mercenaries. For war purposes also they 
find a store of gold and silver useful, since they can use it to pay 
foreign mercenaries. For themselves, they have no money, and 
they teach contempt for gold by using it for chamberpots and the 
chains of bondmen. Pearls and diamonds are used as ornaments 
for infants, but never for adults. When they are at war, they offer 

54' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

large rewards to anyone who will kill the prince of the enemy 
country, and still larger rewards to anyone who will bring him 
alive, or to himself if he yields himself up. They pity the common 
people among their enemies, "knowing that they be driven and 
enforced to war against their wills by the furious madness of their 
princes and heads." Women fight as well as men, but no one is 
compelled to fight. "Engines for war they devise and invent won- 
drous wittily. " It will be seen that their attitude to war is more 
sensible than heroic, though they display great courage when 
necessary. 

As for ethics, we are told that they are too much inclined to 
think that felicity consists in pleasure. This view, however, has no 
bad consequences, because they think that in the next life the good 
are rewarded and the wicked punished. They are not ascetic, and 
consider fasting silly. There are many religions among them, all 
of which are tolerated. Almost all believe in God and immortality; 
the few who do not are not accounted citizens, and have no part 
in political life, but are otherwise unmolested. Some holy men 
eschew meat and matrimony; they are thought holy, but not 
wise. Women can be priests, if they are old and widowed. The 
priests are few; they have honour, but no power. 

Bondmen are people condemned for heinous offences, or 
foreigners who have been condemned to death in their own coun- 
tries, but whom the Utopians have agreed to take as bondmen. 

In the case of a painful incurable disease, the patient is advised 
to commit suicide, but is carefully tended if he refuses to 
do so. 

Raphael Hythloday relates that he preached Christianity to the 
Utopians, and that many were converted when they learnt that 
Christ was opposed to private property. The importance of com- 
munism is constantly stressed ; almost at the end we are told that 
in all other nations "I can perceive nothing but a certain con- 
spiracy of rich men procuring their own commodities under the 
name and title of the common wealth." 

More's Utopia was in many ways astonishingly liberal. I am not 
thinking so much of the preaching of communism, which was in 
the tradition of many religious movements. I am thinking rather 
of what is said about war, about religion and religious toleration, 
against the wanton killing of animals (there is a most eloquent 
passage against hunting), and in favour of a mild criminal law. 

542 



ERASMUS AND MORF 



(The book opens with an argument against the death penalty for 
theft.) It must be admitted, however, that life in More's Utopia, 
as in most others, would be intolerably dull. Diversity is essential 
to happiness, and in Utopia there is hardly any. This is a defect 
of all planned social systems, actual as well as imaginary. 



543 



Chapter V 

THE REFORMATION AND COUNTER- 
REFORMATION 

Y 1HE Reformation and Counter-Reformation, alike, repre- 
I sent the rebellion of less civilized nations against the 
JL intellectual domination of Italy. In the case of the Refor- 
mation, the revolt was also political and theological: the authority 
of the Pope was rejected, and the tribute which he had obtained 
from the power of the keys ceased to be paid. In the case of the 
Counter- Reformation, there was only revolt against the intel- 
lectual and moral freedom of Renaissance Italy; the power of the 
Pope was not diminished, but enhanced, while at the same time 
it was made clear that his authority was incompatible with the 
easy-going laxity of the Borgias and Medici. Roughly speaking, 
the Reformation was German, the Counter- Reformation Spanish; 
the wars of religion were at the same time wars between Spain 
and its enemies, coinciding in date with the period when Spanish 
power was at its height. 

The attitude of public opinion in northern nations towards 
Renaissance Italy is illustrated in the English saying of that time: 

An Englishman Italianate 
Is a devil incarnate. 

It will be observed how many of the villains in Shakespeare are 
Italians. lago is perhaps the most prominent instance, but an even 
more illustrative one is lachimo in Cymbeline, who leads astray the 
virtuous Briton travelling in Italy, and comes to England to prac- 
tise his wicked wiles upon unsuspecting natives. Moral indignation 
against Italians had much to do with the Reformation. Unfor- 
tunately it involved also intellectual repudiation of what Italy had 
done for civilization. 

The three great men of the Reformation and Counter- Reforma- 
tion are Luther, Calvin, and Loyola. All three, intellectually, are 
medieval in philosophy, fcs compared either to the Italians who 
immediately preceded them, or to such men as Erasmus and More. 
Philosophically, the century following the beginning of the Refor- 
mation is a barren one. Luther and Calvin reverted to St. Augus- 

544 



THE REFORMATION AND COUNTER- REFORMATION 

tine, retaining, however, only that part of his teaching which deals 
with the relation of the soul to God, not the part which is con* 
earned with the Church. Their theology was such as to diminish 
the power of the Church. They abolished purgatory, from which 
the souls of the dead could be delivered by masses. They rejected 
the doctrine of Indulgences, upon which a large part of the papal 
revenue depended. By the doctrine of predestination, the fate of 
the soul after death was made wholly independent of the actions 
of priests. These innovations, while they helped in the struggle 
with the Pope, prevented the Protestant Churches from becoming 
as powerful in Protestant countries as the Catholic Church was in 
Catholic countries. Protestant divines were (at least at first) just 
as bigoted as Catholic theologians, but they had less power, and 
were therefore less able to do harm. 

Almost from the very beginning, there was a division among 
Protestants as to the power of the State in religious matters. Luther 
was willing, wherever the prince was Protestant, to recognize him 
as head of the Church in his own country. In England, Henry VIII 
and Elizabeth vigorously asserted their claims in this respect, and 
so did the Protestant princes of Germany, Scandinavia, and (after 
the revolt from Spain) Holland. This accelerated the already exist- 
ing tendency to increase in the power of kings. 

But those Protestants who took seriously the individualistic 
aspects of the Reformation were as unwilling to submit to the king 
as to the Pope. The Anabaptists in Germany were suppressed, but 
their doctrine spread to Holland and England. The conflict 
between Cromwell and the Long Parliament had many aspects; 
in its theological aspect, it was in part a conflict between those 
who rejected and those who accepted the view that the State 
should decide in religious matters. Gradually weariness resulting 
from the wars of religion led to the growth of belief in religious 
toleration, which was one of the sources of the movement which 
developed inlo eighteenth- and nineteenth-century liberalism. 

Protestant success, at first amazingly rapid, was checked mainly 
as a resultant of Loyola's creation of the Jesuit order. Loyola had 
been a soldier, and his order was founded on military models; 
there must be unquestioning obedience to the General, and every 
Jesuit was to consider himself engaged in warfare against heresy. 
As early as the Council of Trent, the Jesuits began to be influen- 
tial. They were disciplined, able, completely devoted to the cause 

tffcfcry of fffffeni /'*ifc**Ay 545 9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and skilful propagandists. Their theology was the opposite of that 
of the Protestants; they rejected those elements of St. Augustine's 
teaching which the Protestants emphasized. They believed in free 
will, and opposed predestination. Salvation was not by faith alone, 
but by both faith and works. The Jesuits acquired prestige by their 
missionary zeal, especially in the Far East. They became popular 
as confessors, because (if Pascal is to be believed) they were more 
lenient, except towards heresy, than other ecclesiastics. They con- 
centrated on education, and thus acquired a firm hold on the minds 
of the young. Whenever theology did not interfere, the education 
they gave was the best obtainable; we shall see that they taught 
Descartes more mathematics than he would have learnt elsewhere. 
Politically, they were a single united disciplined body, shrinking 
from no dangers and no exertions; they urged Catholic princes to 
practise relentless persecution, and, following in the wake of con- 
quering Spanish armies, re-established the terror of the Inquisition, 
even in Italy, which had had nearly a century of free-thought. 

The results of the Reformation and Counter- Reformat ion, in the 
intellectual sphere, were at first wholly bad, but ultimately bene- 
ficial. The Thirty Years' War persuaded everybody that neither 
Protestants nor Catholics could be completely victorious ; it became 
necessary to abandon the medieval hope of doctrinal unity, and 
this increased men's freedom to think for themselves, even about 
fundamentals. The diversity of creeds in different countries made 
it possible to escape persecution by living abroad. Disgust with 
theological warfare turned the attention of able men increasingly 
to secular learning, especially mathematics and science. These are 
among the reasons for the fact that, while the sixteenth century, 
after the rise of Luther, is philosophically barren, the seventeenth 
contains the greatest names and makes the most notable advance 
since Greek times. This advance began in science, with which I 
shall deal in my next chapter. 



546 



Chapter VI 
THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

A MOST everything that distinguishes the modern world from 
earlier centuries is attributable to science, which achieved 
its most spectacular triumphs in the seventeenth century. 
The Italian Renaissance, though not medieval, is not modern; it 
is more akin to the best age of Greece. The sixteenth century, with 
its absorption in theology, is more medieval than the world of 
Machiavelli. The modern world, so far as mental outlook is con- 
cerned, begins in the seventeenth century. No Italian of the 
Renaissance would have been unintelligible to Plato or Aristotle; 
Luther would have horrified Thomas Aquinas, but would not have 
been difficult for him to understand. With the seventeenth century 
it is different: Plato and Aristotle, Aquinas and Occam, could not 
have made head or tail of Newton. 

The new conceptions that science introduced profoundly in- 
fluenced modern philosophy. Descartes, who was in a sense the 
founder of modern philosophy, was himself one of the creators of 
seventeenth-century science. Something must be said about the 
methods and results of astronomy and physics before the mental 
atmosphere of the time in which modern philosophy began can 
be understood. 

Four great men Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton 
arc pre-eminent in the creation of science. Of these, Copernicus 
belongs to the sixteenth century, but in his own time he had little 
influence. 

Copernicus (1473-1543) was a Polish ecclesiastic, of unimpeach- 
able orthodoxy. In his youth he travelled in Italy, and absorbed 
something of the atmosphere of the Renaissance. In 1500 he had 
a lectureship or professorship of mathematics in Rome, but in 1503 
he returned to his native land, where he was a canon of Frauen- 
burg. Much of his time seems to have been spent in combating the 
Germans and reforming the currency, but his leisure was devoted 
to astronomy. He came early to believe tHat the sun is at the centre 
of the universe, and that the earth has a twofold motion: a diurnal 
rotation, and an annual revolution about the sun. Fear of eccle- 
siastical censure led him to delay publication of his views though 

547 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

he allowed them to become known. His chief work, De Revolu- 
tionibus Orbium Ccekstium, was published in the year of his death 
(1543), with a preface by his friend Osiander saying that the helio- 
centric theory was only put forward as a hypothesis. It is uncertain 
how far Copernicus sanctioned this statement, but the question is 
not very important, as he himself made similar statements ii. the 
body of the book. 1 The book is dedicated to the Pope, and escaped 
official Catholic condemnation until the time of Galileo. The 
Church in the lifetime of Copernicus was more liberal than it 
became after the Council of Trent, the Jesuits, and the revived 
Inquisition had done their work. 

The atmosphere of Copernicus's work is not modern ; it might 
rather be described as Pythagorean. He takes it as axiomatic that 
all celestial motions must be circular and uniform, and like the 
Greeks he allows himself to be influenced by aesthetic motives. 
There are still epicycles in his system, though their centres are at 
the sun, or, rather, near the sun. The fact that the sun is not 
exactly in the centre marred the simplicity of his theory. Though 
he had heard of the Pythagorean doctrines, he does not seem to 
have known of Aristarchus's heliocentrictheory,but thcreis nothing 
in his speculations that could not have occurred to a Greek as- 
tronomer. What was important in his work was the dethronement 
of the earth from its geometrical pre-eminence. In the long run, 
this made it difficult to give to man the cosmic importance assigned 
to him in the Christian theology, but such consequences of his 
theory would not have been accepted by Copernicus, whose ortho- 
doxy was sincere, and who protested against the view that his 
theory contradicted the Bible. 

There were genuine difficulties in the Copernican theory. The 
greatest of these was the absence of stellar parallax. If the earth at 
any one point of its orbit is 186,000,000 miles from the point at 
which it will be in six months, this ought to cause a shift in the 
apparent positions of the stars, just as a ship at sea which is due 
north from one point of the coast will not be due north from 
another. No parallax was observed, and Copernicus rightly inferred 
that the fixed stars must be very much more remote than the 
sun. It was not till the nineteenth century that the technique of 
measurement became sufficiently precise for stellar parallax to 

1 See Tltree Copernican Treatises, translated by Edward Rosen, 
Chicago, 1939. 

548 



THE RI6E OF SCIENCE 

be observed, and then only in the case of a few of the nearest 
stars. 

Another difficulty arose as regards falling bodies. If the earth 
is continually rotating from west to east, a body dropped from a 
height ought not to fall to a point vertically below its starting-point, 
but to a point somewhat further west, since the earth will have 
slipped away a certain distance during the time of the fall. To this 
difficulty the answer was found by Galileo's law of inertia, but in 
the time of Copernicus no answer was forthcoming. 

There is an interesting book by E. A. Burtt, called The Meta- 
physical Foundations of Modern Physical Science (1925), which sets 
forth with much force the many unwarrantable assumptions made 
by the men who founded modern science. He points out quite 
truly that there were in the time of Copernicus no known facts 
which compelled the adoption of his system, and several which 
militated against it. "Contemporary empiricists, had they lived 
in the sixteenth century, would have been the first to scoff out of 
court the new philosophy of the universe." The general purpose 
of the hook is to discredit modern science by suggesting that its 
discoveries were lucky accidents springing by chance from super- 
stitions as gross as those of the Middle Ages. I think this shows 
a misconception of the scientific attitude: it is not what the man 
of science believes that distinguishes him, but how and why he 
believes it. His beliefs are tentative, not dogmatic; they are based 
on evidence, not on authority or intuition. Copernicus was right 
to call his theory a hypothesis; his opponents were wrong in 
thinking new hypotheses undesirable. 

The men \\ho founded modern science had two merits which 
are not necessarily found together: immense patience in observa- 
tion, and great boldness in framing hypotheses. The second of 
these merits had belonged to the earliest Greek philosophers; the 
first existed, to a considerable degree, in the later astronomers of 
antiquity. But no one arnonir the ancients, except perhaps Aris- 
tarchus, possessed both merits, and no one in the Middle Ages 
possessed either. Copernicus, like his great successors, possessed 
both. He knew all that could be known, with the instruments 
existing in his day, about the apparent motions of the heavenly 
bodies on the celestial sphere, and he perceived that the diurnal 
rotation of the earth was a more economical hypothesis than the 
revolution of all the celestial spheres According to modern views, 

549 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

which regard all motion as relative, simplicity is the only gain 
resulting from his hypothesis, but this was not his view or that 
of his contemporaries. As regards the earth's annual revolution, 
there was again a simplification, but not so notable a one as in the 
case of the diurnal rotation. Copernicus still needed epicycles, 
though fewer than were needed in the Ptolemaic system. It was 
not until Kepler discovered his laws that the new theory acquired 
its full simplicity. 

Apart from the revolutionary effect on cosmic imagination, the 
great merits of the new astronomy were two: first, the recognition 
that what had been believed since ancient times might be false; 
second, that the test of scientific truth is patient collection of facts, 
combined with bold guessing as to laws binding the facts together. 
Neither merit is so fully developed in Copernicus as in his suc- 
cessors, but both are already present in a hiph degree in his work. 

Some of the men to whom Copernicus communicated his theory 
were German Lutherans, but when Luther came to know of it, he 
was profoundly shocked. "People give ear," he said, "to an upstart 
astrologer who strove to show that the earth revolves, not the 
heavens or the firmament, the sun and the moon. Whoever wishes 
to appear clever must devise some new system, which of all systems 
is of course the very best. This fool wishes to reverse the entire 
science of astronomy; but sacred Scripture tells us that Joshua 
commanded the sun to stand still, and not the earth." Calvin, 
similarly, demolished Copernicus with the text: "The world also 
is stablished, that it cannot be moved" (Psa. xciii. i), and ex- 
claimed: "Who will venture to place the authority of Copernicus 
above that of the Holy Spirit?" Protestant clergy were at least 
an bigoted as Catholic ecclesiastics; nevertheless there soon carne 
to be much more liberty' of speculation in Protestant than in 
Catholic countries, because in Protestant countries the clergy had 
less power. The important aspect of Protestantism was schism, 
not heresy, for schism led to national Churches, and national 
Churches were not strong enough to control the lay government. 
This was wholly a gain, for the Churches, everywhere, opposed as 
long as they could practically every innovation that made for an 
increase of happiness or knowledge here cm earth. 

Copernicus was not in a position to give any conclusive evidence 
in favour of his hypothesis, and for a long time astronomers re- 
jected it. The next astronomer of importance wa Tycho Brahe 

550 



THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

(1546-1601), who adopted an intermediate position: he held that 
the sun and moon go round the earth, but the planets go round 
the sun. As regards theory he was not very original. He gave, 
however, two good reasons against Aristotle's view that everything 
above the moon is unchanging. One of these was the appearance 
of a new star in 1572, which was found to have no daily parallax, 
and must therefore be more distant than the moon. The other 
reason was derived from observation of comets, which were also 
found to be distant. The reader will remember Aristotle's doctrine 
that chance and decay are confined to the sublunary sphere; this, 
like everything else that Aristotle said on scientific subjects, proved 
an obstacle to progress. 

The importance of Tycho Brahe was not as a theorist, but as an 
observer, first under the patronage of the king of Denmark, then 
under the Krnperor Rudolf II. He made a star catalogue, and noted 
the positions of the planets throughout many years. Towards the 
end of his life Kepler, then a young man, became hi? assistant. 
To Kepler his observations were invaluable. 

Kepler (1571-1 630) is one of the most notable examples of what 
can be achieved by patience without much in the way of genius. He 
was the first important astronomer after Copernicus to adopt the 
heliocentric theory, but Tycho lirahc's data showed that it could 
not be quite right in the form given to it by Copernicus. He was 
influenced by Pythagoreanism, and more or less fancifully inclined 
to sun- worship, though a good Protestant. These motives no doubt 
gave him a bias in favour of the heliocentric hypothesis. His 
Pythagoreanisni also inclined him to follow Plato's Timaeus in 
supposing that cosmic significance must attach to the five regular 
solids. He used them to suggest hypotheses to his mind; at last, 
by good luck, one of these worked. 

Kepler's great achievement was the discovery of his three laws 
of planetary motion. Two of these he published in 1609, and the 
third in i6u>. His first law states: The planets describe elliptic 
orbits, of which the sun occupies one focus. His second law states: 
The line joining a planet to the sun sweeps out equal areas in equal 
timc. His third law states: The square ^of the period of revolution 
of a planet is proportional to the cube of its average distance from 
the sun. 

Something must be said in explanation of the importance of 
these laws. 

55' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The first two laws, in Kepler's time, could only be proved in the 
case of Mars; as regards the other planets, the observations were 
compatible with them, but not such as to establish them definitely. 
It was not long, however, before decisive confirmation was found. 

The discovery of the first law, that the planets move in ellipses, 
required a greater effort of emancipation from tradition than a 
modern man can easily realize. The one thing upon which all 
astronomers, without exception, had been agreed, was that all 
celestial motions are circular, or compounded of circular motions. 
Where circles were found inadequate to explain planetary motions, 
epicycles were used. An epicycle is the curve traced by a point on 
a circle which rolls on another circle. For example: take a big 
wheel and fasten it flat on the ground ; take a smaller wheel (also 
flat on the ground) which has a nail through it, and roll the smaller 
wheel round the big wheel, with the point of the nail touching the 
ground. Then the mark of the nail in the ground will trace out an 
epicycle. The orbit of the moon, in relation to the sun, is roughly 
of this kind: approximately, the earth describes a circle round the 
sun, and the moon meanwhile describes a circle round the earth. 
But this is only an approximation. As observation grew more exact, 
it was found that no system of epicycles would exactly fit the facts. 
Kepler's hypothesis, he found, was far more closely in accord with 
the recorded positions of Mars than was that of Ptolemy, or even 
that of Copernicus. 

The substitution of ellipses for circles involved the abandon- 
ment of the aesthetic bias which had governed astronomy ever since 
Pythagoras. The circle was a perfect figure, and the celestial orbs 
were perfect bodies originally gods, and even in Plato and Aris- 
totle closely related to gods. It seemed obvious that a perfect body 
must move in a perfect figure. Moreover, since the heavenly bodies 
move freely, without being pushed or pulled, their motion must 
be "natural." Now it was easy to suppose that there is something 
"natural" about a circle, but not about an ellipse. Thus many 
deep-seated prejudices had to be discarded before Kepler's first 
law could be accepted. No ancient, not even Aristarchus of Samos, 
had anticipated such an hypothesis. 

The second law deals vC'ith the varying velocity of the planet at 
different points of its orbit. If S is the sun, and P |f P 2 , P,, P 4 , P 
are successive positions of the planet at equal intervals of time - 
say st intervals of a month then Kepler's law state* that the 

55* 



THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

areas PjSP,, P 2 SP 3 , P ? SP 4 , P 4 SP B arc all equal. The planet therefore 
moves fastest when it is nearest to the sun, and slowest when it 
is farthest from it. This, again, was shocking; a planet ought to be 
too stately to hurry at one time and dawdle at another. 

The third law was important because it compared the movements 
of different planets, whereas the first two laws dealt with the several 
planets singly. The third law says: If r is the average distance of 
a planet from the sun, and T is the length of its year, then v 9 
divided by T a is the same for all the different planets. This law 
afforded the proof (as far as the solar system is concerned) of 
Newton's law of the inverse square for gravitation. But of this we 
shall speak later. 

Galileo (1564-1642) is the greatest of the founders of modern 
science, with the possible exception of Newton. He was born on 
about the day on which Michelangelo died, and he died in ihe 
year in which Newton was l>orn. I commend these facts to those 
(if any) who still believe in metempsychosis. He is important as an 
astronomer, but perhaps even more as the founder of dynamics. 

Galileo iirst discovered the importance of acceleration in dyna- 
mics. "Acceleration** means change of velocity, whether in mag- 
nitude or direction; thus a body moving uniformly in a circle has 
at all times an acceleration towards the centre of the circle. In the 
language that had been customary before his time, we might say 
that he treated uniform motion in a straight line as alone "natural," 
whether on earth or in the hca\ens. It had been thought "natural" 
for heavenly bodies to move in circles, and for terrestrial bodies 
to move in straight lines: but moving terrestrial bodies, it was 
thought, would gradually cease to move if they were Jet alone, 
(jaliieo held, as against this view, that every body, if left alone, 
will continue to move in a straight line with uniform velocity; any 
change, either in the rapidity or the direction of motion, requires 
to be explained as due to the action of some "force." This principle 
was enunciated by Newton as the "first law of motion." It is also 
called the law of inertia. 1 shall return to its purport later, but first 
something must be said as to the detail of Galileo's discoveries. 

Galileo was the first to establish the law of falling bodies. This 
law, given the concept of "acceleration," is of the utmost sim- 
plicity. It says that, when a body is falling freely, its acceleration 
is constant, except in so far as the resistance of the air may inter- 
fere; further, the acceleration is the same for all bodies, heavy or 

553 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

light, great or small. The complete proof of this law was not 
possible until the air pump had been invented, which was about 
1654. After this, it was possible to observe bodies falling in what 
was practically a vacuum, and it was found that feathers fell as 
fast as lead. What Galileo proved was that there is no measurable 
difference between large and small lumps of the same substance. 
Until his time it had been supposed that a large lump of lead 
would fall much quicker than a small one, but Galileo proved by 
experiment that this is not the case. Measurement, in his day, was 
not such an accurate business as it has since become; nevertheless 
he arrived at the true law of falling bodies. If a body is falling 
freely in a vacuum, its velocity increases at a constant rate. At the 
end of the first second, its velocity will be 32 feet per second; at 
the end of another second, 64 feet per second; at the end of the 
third, 96 feet per second ; and so on. The acceleration, i.e. the rate 
at which the velocity increases, is always the same; in each second, 
the increase of velocity is (approximately) 32 feet per scconJ. 

Galileo also studied projectiles, a subject of importance to his 
employer, the duke of Tuscany. It had been thought that a pro- 
jectile fired horizontally will move horizontally for a while, and 
then suddenly begin to fall vertically. Galileo showed that, apart 
from the resistance of the air, the horizontal velocity would remain 
constant, in accordance with the law of inertia, but a vertical 
velocity would be added, which would grow according to the law 
of falling bodies. To find out how the projectile will move during 
some short time, say a second, after it has been in flight for some 
time, we proceed as follows: First, if it were not falling, it would 
cover a certain horizontal distance, equal to that which it covered 
in the first second of its fiight. Second, if it were not moving 
horizontally, but merely falling, it would fail vertically with a 
velocity proportional to the time since the flight began. In fact, 
its change of place is what it would be if it first moved horizontally 
for a second with the initial velocity, and then fell vertically for 
a second with a velocity proportional to the time during which it 
has been in flight. A simple calculation shows that its consequent 
course is a parabola, and this is confirmed by observation except 
in so far as the resistance" of the air interferes. 

The above gives a simple instance of a principle which proved 
immensely fruitful in dynamics, the principle that, when several 
forces act simultaneously, the effect is is if each acted in turn. This 

554 



THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

is pan of a more general principle called the parallelogram law. 
Suppose, for example, that you are on the deck of a moving ship, 
and you walk across the deck. While you are walking the ship 
has moved on, so that, in relation to the water, you have moved 
both forward and across the direction of the ship's motion. If you 
want to know where you will have got to in relation to the water, 
you may suppose that first you stood still while the ship moved, 
and then, for an equal time, the ship stood still while you walked 
across it. The same principle applies to forces. This makes it 
possible to work out the total effect of a number of forces, and 
makes it feasible to analyse physical phenomena, discovering the 
separate laws of the several forces to which moving bodies are 
subject. It was Galileo who introduced this immensely fruitful 
method. 

In what I have been saying, I have tried to speak, as nearly as 
possible, in the language of the seventeenth century. Modern lan- 
guage is different in important respects, but to explain what the 
seventeenth century achieved it is desirable to adopt its modes of 
expression for the time being. 

The law of inertia explained a puzzle which, before Galileo, the 
Copcrnican system had been unable to explain. As observed above, 
if you drop a stone from the top of a tower, it will fall at the foot 
of the tower, not somewhat to the west of it ; yet, if the earth is 
rotating, it ought to have slipped away a certain distance during 
the fall of the stone. The reason this does not happen is that the 
stone retains the velocity of rotation which, before being dropped, 
it shared with everything else on the earth's surface. In fact, if the 
tower were high enough, there would be the opposite effect to that 
expected by the opponents of Copernicus. The top of the tower, 
being further from the centre of the earth than the bottom, is 
moving faster, and therefore the stone should fall slightly to the 
east of the foot of die tower. This effect, however, would be too 
slight to be measurable. 

Galileo ardently adopted the heliocentric system; he corre- 
sponded with Kepler, and accepted his discoveries. Having heard 
that a Dutchman had lately invented a telescope, Galileo made one 
himself, and very quickly discovered a number of important things. 
He found that the Milky Way consists of a multitude of separate 
stars. He observed the phases of Venus, which Copernicus knew 
to be implied by his theory, but which the naked eye was unable 

555 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

to perceive. He discovered the satellites of Jupiter, which, in 
honour of his employer, he called "sidera medicea." It was found 
that these satellites obey Kepler's laws. There was, however, a 
difficulty. There had always been seven heavenly bodies, the five 
planets and the sun and moon ; now seven is a sacred number. Is 
not the Sabbath the seventh day? Were there not the seven- 
branched candlesticks and the seven churches of Asia ? What, then, 
could be more appropriate than that there should be seven heavenly 
bodies? But if we have to add Jupiter's four moons, that makes 
eleven a number which has no mystic properties. On this ground 
the traditionalists denounced the telescope, refused to look through 
it, and maintained that it revealed only delusions. Galileo wrote 
to Kepler wishing they could have a good laugh together at the 
stupidity of "the mob"; the rest of his letter nukes it plain that 
"the mob" consisted of the professors of philosophy, who tried to 
conjure away Jupiter's moons, using "logic-chopping arguments 
as though they were magical incantations/' 

Galileo, as everyone knows, was condemned by the Inquisition, 
first privately in 1616, and then publicly in 1633, on which latter 
occasion he recanted, and promised never again to maintain that 
the earth rotates or revolves. The Inquisition was successful in 
putting an end to science in Italy, which did not revive there for 
centuries. But it failed to prevent men of science from adopting 
the heliocentric theory, and did considerable damage to the Church 
by its stupidity. Fortunately there were Protestant countries, where 
the clergy, however anxious to do harm to science, were unable 
to gain control of the State. 

Newton (1642-1727) achieved the final and complete triumph 
for which Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo had prepared the way. 
Starting from his three laws of motion of which the first two arc 
due to Galileo he proved that Kepler's three laws are equivalent 
to the proposition that every planet, at every moment, has an 
acceleration towards the sun which varies inversely as the square 
of the distance from the sun. He showed dial accelerations towards 
the earth and the sun, following the same formula, explain the 
moon's motion, and that the acceleration of falling bodies on the 
earth's surface is again related to tiiat of the moou according to 
the inverse square law* He defined "force" as the cause of change 
of motion, i.e. of acceleration, lie was thu* able to enunciate hi* 
tow of universal gravitation: "Every body attracts every other with 

556 



THE RISE OP SCIENCE 

a force directly proportional to the product of their masses and 
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them." 
From this formula he was able to deduce everything in planetary 
theory: the motions of the planets and their satellites, the orbits 
of comets, the tides. It appeared later that even the minute depar- 
tures from elliptical orbits on the part of the planets were deducible 
from Newton's law. The triumph was so complete that Newton 
was in danger of becoming another Aristotle, and imposing an 
insuperable barrier to progress. In England, it was not till a century 
after his death that men freed themselves from his authority 
sufficiently to do important original work in the subjects of which 
he had treated. 

The seventeenth century was remarkable, not only in astronomy 
and dynamics, but in many other ways connected with science. 

Take first the question of scientific instruments. 1 The compound 
microscope was invented just before the seventeenth century, about 
1590. The telescope was invented in 1608, by a Dutchman named 
Lippershey, though it was Galileo who first made serious use of it 
for scientific purposes. Galileo also invented the thermometer at 
least, this seems most probable. His pupil Torricelli invented the 
barometer. Gucricke (1602-86) invented the air pump. Clocks, 
though not new, were greatly improved in the seventeenth century, 
largely by the work of Galileo. Owing to these inventions, scientific 
observation became immensely more exact and more extensive 
than it had been at any former time. 

Next, there was important work in other sciences than astronomy 
and dynamics. Gilbert (i 540-1603) published his great book on the 
magnet in 1600. Harvey (1578-1657) discovered the circulation 
of the blood, and published his discovery in 1628. Leeuwenhoek 
( 1632-1 723) discovered spermatozoa, though another man, Stephen 
Hiimm, had discovered them, apparently, a few months earlier; 
Leeuwenhoek also discovered protozoa or unicellular organisms, 
and even bacteria. Robert Boyle (1627-91) was, as children were 
taught when I was young, "the father of chemistry and son of the 
Karl of Cork' 1 ; he is now chiefly remembered on account of 
"Boyle ' Law," that in a given quantity of gas at a given tern- 
perature, pressure is inversely proportional to volume. 

1 On thi* subject, ire the chapter "Scientific Instruments" in A 
Hittory of Science, Technology, and Philosophy in the Sixteenth and 
S*v*nU*nih Ctnturiei, by A. Wolf. 

557 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

1 have hitherto said nothing of the advances in pure mathe- 
matics, but these were very great indeed, and were indispensable 
to much of the work in the physical sciences. Napier published 
his invention of logarithms in 1614. Co-ordinate geometry resulted 
from the work of several seventeenth-century mathematicians, 
among whom the greatest contribution was made by Descartes. 
The differential and integral calculus was invented independently 
by Newton and Leibniz; it is the instrument for almost all higher 
mathematics. These are only the most outstanding achievements 
in pure mathematics; there were innumerable others of great 
importance:. 

The result of the scientific work we have been considering was 
that the outlook of educated men was completely transformed. At 
the beginning of the century, Sir Thomas Browne took part in 
trials for witchcraft; at the end, such a thing would have been 
impossible. In Shakespeare's time, cornets were still portents; after 
the publication of Newton's Principia in 1687, it was known that 
he and Halley had calculated the orbits of certain comets, and that 
they were as obedient as the planets to the law of gravitation. The 
reign of law had established its hold on men's imaginations, making 
such things as magic and sorcery incredible. In 1700 the mental 
outlook of educated men was completely modern; in ifoo, except 
among a very few, it was still largely medieval. 

In the remainder of this chapter I sliall try to state briefly the 
philosophical beliefs which appeared to follow from seventeenth- 
century science, and some of the respects in which modern science 
differs from that of Newton. 

The first thing to note is the removal of almost all traces ot 
animism from the laws of physics. The Greeks, though they did 
not say so explicitly, evidently considered the power of movement 
a sign of life. To common-sense observation it seems that animals 
move themselves, while dead matter only moves when impelled 
by an external force. The soul of an animal, in Aristotle, has various 
functions, and one of them is to move the animal's body. The sun 
and planets, in Greek thinking, are apt to be gods, or at least 
regulated and moved by gods. Anaxagoras thought otherwise, but 
was impious. Democritus* thought otherwise, but was neglected, 
except by the Epicureans, in favour of Plato and Aristotle. Aris- 
totle's forty-seven or fifty-five unmoved movers are divine spirits, 
and are the ultimate source of all the motion in the heavens. Left 



THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

co itself, any inanimate body would soon become motionless; thus 
the operation of soul on matter has to be continuous if motion is 
not to cease. 

All this was changed by the first law of motion. Lifeless matter, 
once set moving, will continue to move for ever unless stopped 
by some external cause. Moreover the external causes of change 
of motion turned out to be themselves material, whenever they 
could be definitely ascertained. The solar system, at any rate, was 
kept going by its own momentum and its own laws; no outside 
interference was needed. There might still seem to be need of 
God to set the mechanism working; the planets, according to 
New-ton, were originally hurled by the hand of God. But when 
1 le had done this, and decreed the law of gravitation, everything 
went on by itself without further need of divine intervention. 
When Laplace suggested that the same forces which are now 
operative might have caused the planets to grow out of the sun, 
God's share in the course of nature was pushed still further back. 
I It might remain as Creator, but even that was doubtful, since it 
was not clear that the world had a beginning in time. Although 
most of the men of science were models of piety, the outlook 
suggested by their work was disturbing to orthodoxy, and the 
theologians were quite justified in feeling uneasy. 

Another thing that resulted from science was a profound change 
in the conception of man's place in the universe. In the medieval 
world, the earth was the centre of the heavens, and everything had 
a purpose concerned with man. In the Newtonian world, the earth 
was a minor planet of a not specially distinguished star; astrono- 
mical distances were so vast that the earth, in comparison, was 
a mere pin-point. It seemed unlikely that this immense apparatus 
was all designed for the good of. certain small creatures on this 
pin-point. Moreover purpose, which had since Aristotle formed 
an intimate part of the conception of science, was now thrust out 
of scientific procedure. Anyone might still believe that the heavens 
exist to declare the glory of God, but no one could let this belief 
intervene in an astronomical calculation. The world might have 
a purpose, but purposes could no longer enter into scientific 
explanations. 

'l*he Copernican theory should have been humbling to human 
pride, but in fact the contrary effect was produced, for the triumphs 
of science revived human pride. The dying ancient world had been 

559 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

obsessed with a sense of sin, and had bequeathed this as an oppres- 
sion to the Middle Ages. To be humble before God was both right 
and prudent, for God would punish pride. Pestilences, floods, 
earthquakes, Turks, Tartars, and comets perplexed the gloomy 
centuries, and it was felt that only greater and greater humility 
would avert these real or threatened calamities. But it became 
impossible to remain humble when men were achieving such 
triumphs : 

Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night. 
God said "Let Newton be," and all was light. 

And as for damnation, surely the Creator of so vast a universe had 
something better to think about than sending men to hell for 
minute theological errors. Judas Iscariot might be damned, but 
not Newton, though he were an Arian. 

There were of course many other reasons for self-satisfaction. 
The Tartars had been confined to Asia, and the Turks were ceasing 
to be a menace. Comets had been humbled by H alley, and as for 
earthquakes, though they were still formidable, they were so in- 
teresting that men of science could hardly regret them. Western 
Europeans were growing rapidly richer, and were becoming lords 
of all the world: they had conquered North and South America, 
they were powerful in Africa and India, respected in China and 
feared in Japan. When to all this were added the triumphs of 
science, it is no wonder that the men of the seventeenth century 
felt themselves to be fine fellows, not the miserable sinners that 
they still proclaimed themselves on Sundays. 

There are some respects in which the concepts of modern 
theoretical physics differ from those of the Newtonian system. To 
begin with, the conception of "force," which is prominent in the 
seventeenth century, has been found to be superfluous. 4t Force/ 1 
in Newton, is the cause of change of motion, whether in magnitude 
or direction. The notion of cause is regarded as important, and 
force is conceived imaginatively as the sort of thing that we expe- 
rience when we push or pull. For this reason it was considered 
an objection to gravitation that it acted at a distance, and Newton 
himself conceded that thqre must be some medium by which it 
was transmitted. Gradually it was found that all the equations 
could be written down without bringing in forces. What was ob- 
servable was a certain relation between acceleration and configura- 

560 



THE RISE OF SCIENCE 

tion; to say that this relation was brought about by the inter- 
mediacy of "force" was to add nothing to our knowledge. Obser- 
vation shows that planets have at all times an acceleration towards 
the sun, which varies inversely as the square of their distance from 
it. To say that this is due to the "force" of gravitation is merely 
verbal, like saying that opium makes people sleep because it has 
a dormitive virtue. The modern physicist, therefore, merely states 
formulae which determine accelerations, and avoids the word 
"force" altogether. "Force" was the faint ghost of the vitalist 
view as to the causes of motions, and gradually the ghost has been 
exorcized. 

Until the coming of quantum mechanics, nothing happened to 
modify in any degree what is the essential purport of the first two 
laws of motion, namely this: that the laws of dynamics are to be 
stated in terms of accelerations. In this respect, Copernicus and 
Kepler are still to be classed with the ancients; they sought laws 
stating the shapes of the orbits of the heavenly bodies. Newton 
made it clear that laws stated in this form could never be more 
than approximate. The planets do not move in exact ellipses, 
because of the perturbations caused by the attractions of other 
planets. Nor is the orbit of a planet ever exactly repeated, for the 
same reason. But the law of gravitation, which dealt with accele- 
rations, was very simple, and was thought to be quite exact until 
two hundred years after Newton's time. When it was amended by 
Kinstein, it still remained a law dealing with accelerations. 

It is true that the conservation of energy is a law dealing with 
velocities, not accelerations. But in calculations which use this law 
it is still accelerations that have to be employed. 

As for the changes introduced by quantum mechanics, they are 
very profound, but still, to some degree, a matter of controversy 
and uncertainty. 

There is one change from the Newtonian philosophy which must 
he mentioned now, and that is the abandonment of absolute space 
and time. The 'reader will remember a mention of this question 
in connection with Dcmocritus. Newton believed in a space com- 
posed of points, and a time composed of instants, which had an 
existence independent of the bodies andevents that occupied them. 
As regards space, he had an empirical argument to support his 
view, namely that physical phenomena enable us to distinguish 
absolute rotation. If the water in a bucket is rotated, it climbs up 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the sides and is depressed in the centre; but if the bucket is 
rotated while the water is not, there is no such effect. Since his 
day, the experiment of Foucault's pendulum has been devised, 
giving what has been considered a demonstration of the earth's 
rotation. Even on the most modern views, the question of absolute 
rotation presents difficulties. If all motion is relative, the difference 
between the hypothesis that the earth rotates and the hypothesis 
that the heavens revolve is purely verbal; it is no more than the 
difference between "John is the father of James" and "James is 
the son of John." But if the heavens revolve, the stars move faster 
than light, which is considered impossible. It cannot be said that 
the modern answers to this difficulty are completely satisfying, but 
they are sufficiently satisfying to cause almost all physicists to 
accept the view that motion and space are purely relative. This, 
combined with the amalgamation of space and time into space- 
time, has considerably altered our view of the universe from that 
which resulted from the work of Galileo and Newton. But of this, 
as of quantum theory, I \viil sny no more at this time. 



562 



Chapter VII 
FRANCIS BACON 

FRANCIS RATON (1561-1626), although his philosophy is in 
many ways unsatisfactory, has permanent importance as the 
founder of modern inductive method and the pioneer in the 
attempt at logical systematization of scientific procedure. 

He was a son of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great 
Seal, and his aunt was the wife of Sir William Cecil, afterwards 
Lord Burghley ; he thus grew up in the atmosphere of State affairs. 
He entered Parliament at the age of twenty-three, and became 
adviser to Essex. None the less, when Essex fell from favour he 
helped in his prosecution. For this he has been severely blamed : 
Lytton Strachey. for example, in his Elisabeth and Essex, represents 
Bacon as a monster of treachery and ingratitude. This is quite 
unjust. He worked with Essex while Essex was loyal, but aban- 
doned him when continued loyalty to him would have been 
treasonable; in this there was nothing that even the most rigid 
moralist of the age could condemn. 

In spite of his abandonment of Essex, he was never completely 
in favour during the lifetime of Queen Elizabeth. With James's 
accession, however, his prospects improved. In 1617 he acquired 
his father's office of Keeper of the Great Seal, and in 1618 he 
became Lord Chancellor. But after he had held this great position 
for only two years, he was prosecuted for accepting bribes from 
litigants. He admitted the truth of the accusation, pleading only 
that present* never influenced his decision. As to that, anyone may 
form his own opinion, since there can be no evidence as to the 
decisions that Bacon would have come to in other circumstances. 
He was condemned to a fine of 40,000, to imprisonment in the 
Tower during the king's pleasure, to perpetual banishment from 
Court and inability to hold office. This sentence was only very 
partially executed: He was not forced to pay the fine, and he was 
kept in the Tower for only four days. But he was compelled to 
abandon public lite, and to spend the* remainder of his days to 
writing important books. 

The ethics of the legal profession, in those days, were somewhat 
lax. Almost every judge accepted presents, usually from both sides. 

563 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Nowadays we think it atrocious for a judge to take bribes, but even 
more atrocious, after taking them, to decide against the givers of 
them. In thpse days, presents were a matter of course, and a judge 
showed his "virtue" by not being influenced by them. Bacon was 
condemned as an incident in a party squabble, not because he was 
exceptionally guilty. He was not a man of outstanding moral 
eminence, like his forerunner Sir Thomas More, but he was also 
not exceptionally wicked. Morally, he was an average man, no 
better and no worse than the bulk of his contemporaries. 

After five years spent in retirement, he died of a chill caught 
while experimenting on refrigeration by stuffing a chicken full of 
snow. 

Bacon's most important book, The Advancement of Learning > is 
in many ways remarkably modern. He is commonly regarded as 
the originator of the saying "Knowledge is power/' and though 
he may have had predecessors who said the same thing, he said 
t it with new emphasis. The whole basis of his philosophy was 
1 practical: to give mankind mastery over the forces of nature by 
j means of scientific discoveries and inventions. He held that philo- 
1 sophy should be kept separate from theology* not intimately 
blended with it as in scholasticism. He accepted orthodox religion ; 
he was not the man to quarrel with the government on such a 
matter. But while he thought that reason could show the existence 
of God, he regarded everything else in theology as known only 
by revelation. Indeed he held that the triumph of faith is greatest 
when to the unaided reason a dogma appears most absurd. Philo- 
sophy, however, sl)pjuld_depend only upon reason. He was thus 
an advocate of the doctrine of "double truth/' that of reason and 
that of revelation. This doctrine had been preached by certain 
Averroists in the thirteenth century, but had been condemned by 
the Church. The "triumph of faith*' was, for the orthodox, a 
dangerous device. Bayle, in the late seventeenth century, made 
ironical use of it, setting forth at great length all that reason could 
say against some orthodox belief, and then concluding "so much 
the greater is the triumph of faith in nevertheless believing." 
How far Bacon's orthodoxy was sincere it is impossible to 
know. 

Bacon was the first of the long line of scientifically minded 
philosophers who have emphasized the importance of induction 
as opposed to deduction. Like most of his successors, he tried to 

564 



FRANCIS BACON 

find some better kind of induction than what is called "induction 
by simple enumeration." Induction by simple enumeration may 
be illustrated by a parable. There was once upon a time a census 
officer who had to record the names of all householders in a certain 
Welsh village. The first that he questioned was called William 
Williams; so were the second, third, fourth. ... At last he said 
to himself: "This is tedious; evidently they are all called William 
Williams. I shall put them down so and take a holiday." But he 
was wrong; there was just one whose name was John Jones. This 
shows that we may go astray if we trust too implicitly to induction 
by simple enumeration. 

Bacon believed that he had a method by which induction could 
be made something better than this. He wished, for example, to 
discover the nature of heat, wliich he supposed (rightly) to consist 
of rapid irregular motions of the small parts of bodies. His method 
was to make lists of hot bodies, lists of cold bodies, and lists of 
bodies of varying degrees of heat. He hoped that these lists would 
show some characteristic always present in hot bodies and absent 
in cold bodies, and present in varying degrees in bodies of different 
degrees of heat. By this method he expected to arrive at general 
laws, having, in the first instance, the lowest degree of generality. 
From a number of such laws he hoped to reach laws of the second 
degree of generality, and so on. A suggested law should be tested 
by being applied in new circumstances; if it worked in these 
circumstances it was to that extent confirmed. Some instances are 
specially valuable because they enable us to decide between two 
theories, each possible as far as previous observations are con- 
cerned; such instances are called "prerogative" instances. 

Bacon not only despised the syllogism, but undervalued mathe- 
matics, presumably as insufficiently experimental. He was viru- 
lently hostile to Aristotle, but thought very highly of Democritus. 
Although he did not deny that the course of nature exemplifies 
a divine purpose, he objected to any admixture of teleological 
explanation in the actual investigation of phenomena; everything, 
he held, should be explained as following necessarily from efficient 
causes. 

He valued his method as showing how to arrange the observa- 
tional data upon which science must be based. We ought, he says, 
to be neither like spiders, which spin things out of their own 
inside*, nor like ants, which merely collect, but like bees, which 

565 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

both collect and arrange. This is somewhat unfair to the ants, but 
it illustrates Bacon's meaning. 

One of the most famous parts of Bacon's philosophy is his 
enumeration of what he calls "idols," by which he means bad 
habits of mind that cause people to fall into error. Of these he 
enumerates five kinds. "Idols of the tribe" are those that are 
inherent in human nature; he mentions in particular the habit of 
expecting more order in natural phenomena than is actually to be 
found. "Idols of the cave" are personal prejudices, characteristic 
of the particular investigator. * 4 Idols of the market-place" are those 
that have to do with the tyranny of words and the difficulty of 
escaping from their influence over our minds. "Idols of the theatre" 
are those that have to do with received systems of thoucht; of 
these, naturally, Aristotle and the scholastics afforded him the most 
noteworthy instances. Lastly there are "idols of the schools/' 
which consist in thinking that some blind rule (such as the 
syllogism) can take the place of judgment in investigation. 

Although science was what interested Bacon, and although his 
general outlook was scientific, he missed most of what was being 
done in science in his day. He rejected the Copcrnican theory, 
which was excusable so far as Copernicus himself was concerned, 
since he did not advance any very solid arguments. But Bacon 
ought to have been convinced by Kepler, whose New Astronomy 
appeared in 1609. Bacon appears not to have known of the work 
of Vesalius, the pioneer of modern anatomy, though he admired 
Gilbert, whose work on magnetism brilliantly illustrated inductive 
method. Surprisingly, heseemed unconscious of the work of I larvcy, 
although Harvey was his medical attendant. It is true that Harvey 
did not publish his discover}' of the circulation of the blood until 
after Bacon's death, but one would have supposed that Bacon 
would have been aware of his researches. Harvey had no very high 
opinion of him, saying "he writes philosophy like a Ix>rd Chan- 
cellor." No doubt Bacon could have done better if he had been 
less concerned with worldly success. 

Bacon's inductive method is faulty through insufficient emphasis 
on hypothesis. He hoped that mere orderly arrangement of data 
would make the right hypothesis obvious, but this is seldom the 
case. As a rule, the framing of hypotheses is the most difficult part 
of scientific work, and the part where great ability is indispensable. 
So far, no method has been found which would make it possible 

566 



FRANCIS BACON 

to invent hypotheses by rule. Usually some hypothesis is a neces- 
sary preliminary to the collection of facts, since the selection of 
facts demands some way of determining relevance. Without some- 
thing of this kind, the mere multiplicity of facts is baffling. 

The part played by deduction in science is greater than Bacon 
supposed. Often, when a hypothesis has to be tested, there is a 
long deductive journey from the hypothesis to some consequence 
that can be tested by observation. Usually the deduction is mathe- 
matical, and in this respect Bacon underestimated the importance 
of mathematics in scientific investigation. 

The problem of induction by simple enumeration remains un- 
solved to this day. Bacon was quite right in rejecting simple 
enumeration \vhere the details of scientific investigation are con- 
cerned, for in dealing with details we may assume general laws 
on the basis of which, so long as they are taken as valid, more or 
less cogent methods can be built up. John Stuart Mill framed four 
canons of inductive method, which can be usefully employed so 
long as the law of causality is assumed ; but this law itself, he had 
to confess, is to !>e accepted solely on the basi.- of induction by 
simple enumeration. The thiny that is achieved by the theoretical 
organization of science is the collection of all subordinate induc- 
tions into a few that are very comprehensive- -perhaps only one. 
Such comprehensive inductions are confirmed by so many in- 
stances that it is thought legitimate to accept, as regards them, an 
induction by simple enumeration. This situation i? profoundly 
unsatisfactory, but neither Bacon nor any of his successors have 
found a wav out of it. 



567 



Chapter VIII 
HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

HOBBES (1588-1679) is a philosopher whom it is difficult to 
classify. He was an empiricist, like Locke, Berkeley, and 
Hume, but unlike them, he was an admirer of mathe- 
matical method, not only in pure mathematics, but in its appli- 
cations. His general outlook was inspired by Galileo rather than 
Bacon. From Descartes to Kant, Continental philosophy derived 
much of its conception of the nature of human knowledge from 
mathematics, but it regarded mathematics as known independently 
of experience. It was thus led, like Platonism, to minimize the part 
played by perception, and over-emphasize the part played by pure 
thought. English empiricism, on the other hand, was little in- 
fluenced by mathematics, and tended to have a wrong conception 
of scientific method. Hobbes had neither of these defects. It is 
not until our own day that we find any other philosophers who 
were empiricists and yet laid due stress on mathematics. In this 
respect, Hobbes 's merit is great. He has, however, grave defects, 
which make it impossible to place him quite in the first rank, lie 
is impatient of subtleties, and too much inclined to cut the 
Gordian knot. His solutions of problems are logical, but are 
attained by omitting awkward facts. He is vigorous, but crude; 
he wields the battle-axe better than the rapier. Nevertheless, his 
theory of the State deserves to be carefully considered, the more 
so as it is more modern than any previous theory, even that of 
Machiavelli. 

Hobbes 's father was a vicar, who was ill-tempered and un- 
educated ; he lost his job by quarrelling with a neighbouring vicar 
at the church door. After this, Hobbes was brought up by an 
uncle. He acquired a good knowledge of the classics, and translated 
The Medea of Euripides into Latin iambics at the age of fourteen. 
(In later life, he boasted, justifiably, that though he abstained from 
quoting classical poets and orators, this was not from lack of 
familiarity with their works.) At fifteen, he went to Oxford, where 
they taught him scholastic logic and the philosophy of Aristotle. 
These were his bugbears in later life, and he maintained that he 
had profited little by his years at the university; indeed univcr- 



HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

sities in general are constantly criticized in his writings. In the 
year 1610, when he was twenty-two years old, he became tutor to 
Lord Hardwick (afterwards second Earl of Devonshire), with 
whom he made the grand tour. It was at this time that he began 
to know the work oif Galileo and Kepler, which profoundly in- 
fluenced him. His pupil became his patron, and remained so 
until he died in 1628. Through him, Hobbes met Ben Jonson and 
Bacon and Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and many other important 
men. After the death of the Earl of Devonshire, who left a young 
son, Hobbes lived for a time in Paris, where he began the study of 
Euclid; then he became tutor to his former pupil's son. With him 
he travelled to Italy, where he visited Galileo in 1636. In 1637 
he came back to England. 

The political opinions expressed in the Leviathan, which were 
Royalist in the extreme, had been held by Hobbes for a long time. 
When the Parliament of 1628 drew up the Petition of Right, he 
published a translation of Thucydides, with the expressed inten- 
tion of showing the evils of democracy. When the Long Parlia- 
ment met in 1640, and Laud and Strafford were sent to the Tower, 
Hobbes was terrified and fled to France. His book, De Give, 
written in 1641, though not published till 1647, sets forth essen- 
tially the same theory as that of the leviathan. It was not the 
actual occurrence of the Civil War that caused his opinions, 
but the prospect of it; naturally, however, his convictions were 
strengthened when his fears were realized. 

In Paris he was welcomed by many of the leading mathe- 
maticians and men of science. lie was one of those who saw 
Descartes* Meditation* before they were published, and wrote 
objections to them, which were printed by Descartes with his 
replies. He also soon had a large company of English Royalist 
refugees with whom to associate. For a time, from 1646 to 1648, 
he taught mathematics to the future Charles II. When, however, 
in 1651, he published the leviathan, it pleased no one. Its 
rationalism offended most of the refugees, and its bitter attacks 
on the Catholic Church offended the French Government. 
Hobbes therefore fled secretly to London, where he made sub- 
mission to Cromwell, and abstained from all political activity. 

He was not idle, however, either at this time or at any other 
during his long life. He had a controversy with Bishop Bramhall 
on free will ; he was himself a rigid dcterrninist. Over-estimating 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

his own capacities as a geometer, he imagined that he had dis- 
covered how to square the circle; on this subject he very foolishly 
embarked on a controversy with Wallis, the professor of geometry 
at Oxford. Naturally the professor succeeded in making him 
look silly. 

At the Restoration, Hobbes was taken up by the less earnest of 
the king's friends, and by the king himself, who not only had 
Hobbes's portrait on his walls, but awarded him a pension of 
100 a year which, however, His Majesty forgot to pay. The 
Lord Chancellor Clarendon was shocked by the favour shown to 
a man suspected of atheism, and so was Parliament. After the 
Plague and the Great Fire, when people's superstitious fears were 
aroused, the House of Commons appointed a committee to inquire 
into atheistical writings, specially mentioning those of Ilobhcs. 
From this time onwards, he could not obtain leave in England to 
print anything on controversial subjects. Even his history of the 
Long Parliament, which he called Belieruoth, thowh it set u>rth 
the most orthodox doctrine, had to he printed ahr ad do(>Sj. The 
collected edition of his works in 1688 appeared in Amsterdam. In 
his eld age, his reputation abroad was n.uch greater than in 
England. To occupy his leisure, he v. rote, at eighty-four, an 
autobiography in Latin verse, and published, at eighty-seven, a 
translation of Homer. I cannot disc-over that he wrote any large 
books after the age of eighty-seven. 

We wiM m \\ consider the doctrines of the l^ei'iathan, upon 
which the fame of Hobbes mainly rests. 

He prochnas, at the very beginning of the book, his thorough- 
going materialism. Life, he says, is nothing but a motion ol" the 
limbs, and therefore automata have an artificial life. The common- 
wealth, which he calls Leviathan, is a creation of art, ai.d is in 
fact an artificial man. This is intended as more than an ana* >uy, 
and is worked out in some detail. The sovereignty is an artificial 
soul. The pacts and covenants by which "Leviathan" is first 
created take the place of God's fiat when He said "Let I's make 
man." 

The first part deals with man as an individual, and with such 
general philosophy as Hobbes deem* necessary. Sensations arc 
caused by the pressure of objects; colours, sounds, etc., are not 
in the objects. The qualities in objects that correspond to our 
sensations are motions. The first law of motion u* stated, and is 



HOBBFS'S LEVIATHAN 

immediately applied to psychology: imagination is a decaying 
sense, both being motions. Imagination when asleep is dreaming; 
the religions of the gentiles came of not distinguishing dreams 
from waking life. (The rash reader may apply the same argument 
to the Christian religion, but Hobbes is much too cautious to do 
so himself. 1 ) Belief that dreams are prophetic is a delusion; sa 
is the belief in witchcraft and in ghosts. 

The succession of our thoughts is not arbitrary, but governed 
by laws sometimes those of association, sometimes those 
depending upon a purpose in our thinking. (This is important as 
an application of determinism to psychology.) 

Hobbes, as might be expected, is an out-and-out nominalist. 
There is, he says, nothing universal but names, and without words 
we could not conceive any general ideas. Without language, there 
would be no truth or falsehood, for "true" and "false" are 
attributes of speech. 

He considers geometry the one genuine science so far created. 
Reasoning is of the nature of reckoning, and should start from 
definitions. But it is necessary to avoid self-contradictory notions 
in definitions, which is not usually done in philosophy. * 4 Incor- 
poreal substance," for instance, is nonsense. When it is objected 
that God is an incorporeal substance, Hobbes has two answers: 
first, that God is not an object of philosophy; second, that many 
philosophers have thought God corporeal. All error in general 
propositions, he says, conies from absurdity (i.e. self-contradic- 
tion); he gives as examples of absurdity the idea of free will, and 
of cheese having the accidents of bread. (We know that, according 
to the Catholic faith, the accidents of bread can inhere in a sub- 
stance that is not bread.) 

In this pannage Hobbes shows an old-fashioned rationalism. 
Kepler had arrived at a general proposition: "Planets go round 
the sun in ellipses"; but other \icws, such as those of Ptolemy, 
are not logically absurd. Hobbes has not appreciated the use of 
induction for arriving at general laws, in spite of his admiration 
for Kepler and Galileo. 

As against Plato, Hobbes holds that reason is not innate, but is 
developed by industry. 

He conies next to a consideration of the passions. "Endeavour" 

1 Klnewhcrc he saya that the heathen gods were croitted by human 
Jem-, but that our God i tht First Mover. 

57" 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

may be defined as a small beginning of motion ; if towards some- 
thing, it is desire, and if away from something it is aversion. Love 
is the same as desire, and hate is the same as aversion. We call 
a thing "good" when it is an object of desire, and "bad" when it 
is an object of aversion. (It will be observed that these definitions 
give no objectivity to "good 1 * and "bad"; if men differ in their 
desires, there is no theoretical method of adjusting their differ- 
ences.) There are definitions of various passions, mostly based on 
a competitive view of life; for instance, laughter is sudden glory. 
Fear of invisible power, if publicly allowed, is religion ; if not 
allowed, superstition. Thus the decision as to what is religion and 
what superstition rests with the legislator. Felicity involves con- 
tinual progress; it consists in prospering, not in having prospered ; 
there is no such thing as a static happiness excepting, of course, 
the joys of heaven, which surpass our comprehension. 

Will is nothing but the last appetite or aversion remaining in 
deli be radon. That is to say, will is not something different from 
desire and aversion, but merely the strongest in a case of conflict. 
This is connected, obviously, with Hobbes's denial of free will. 

Unlike most defenders of despotic government, Hobbes holds 
that all men are naturally equal. In a state of nature, before there 
is any government, every man desires to preserve his own liberty, 
but to acquire dominion over others; both these desires are 
dictated by the impulse to self-preservation. From their conflict 
arises a war of all against all, which makes life "nasty, brutish, 
and short." In a state of nature, there is no property, no justice 
or injustice; there is only war, and "force and fraud are, in war, 
the two cardinal virtues." 

The second part tells how men escape from these evils by com- 
bining into communities each subject to a central authority. This 
is represented as happening by means of a social contract. It is 
supposed that a number of people come together and agree to 
choose a sovereign, or a sovereign body, which shall exercise 
authority over them and put an end to the universal war. I do not 
think this "covenant" (as Hobbes usually calls it) is thought of as 
a definite historical event ; it is certainly irrelevant to the argument 
to think of it as such. It is an explanatory myth, used to explain 
why men submit, and should submit, to the limitations on personal 
freedom entailed in submission to authority. The purpose of the 
restraint men put upon themselves, says Hobbes, is aelf~prc*er- 

572 



HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

vation from the universal war resulting from our love of liberty 
for ourselves and of dominion over others. 

Hobbes considers the question why men cannot co-operate like 
ants and bees. Bees in the same hive, he says, do not compete; they 
have no desire for honour; and they do not use reason to criticize 
the government. Their agreement is natural, but that of men can 
only be artificial, by covenant. The covenant must confer power 
on one man or one assembly, since otherwise it cannot be enforced. 
"Covenants, without the sword, are but words." (President 
Wilson unfortunately forgot this.) The covenant is not, as after- 
wards in Jxxrkc and Rousseau, between the citizens and the ruling 
power; it is a covenant made by the citizens with each other to 
obey such ruling power as the majority shall choose. When they 
have chosen, their political power is at an end. The minority is as 
much bound as the majority, since the covenant was to obey the 
government chosen by the majority. When the government has 
been chosen, the citizens lose all rights except such as the govern- 
ment may find it expedient to grant. There is no right of rebellion, 
because the ruler is not bound by any contract, whereas the 
subjects are. 

A multitude so united is called a commonwealth. This 
"Leviathan** is a mortal God. 

Hobbes prefers monarchy, but all his abstract arguments are 
equally applicable to all forms of government in which there is 
one supreme authority not limited by the legal rights of other 
bodies. He could tolerate Parliament alone, but not a system in 
which governmental power is shared between King and Parlia- 
ment. This is the exact antithesis to the views of Locke and 
Montesquieu. The Knglish Civil War occurred, says Hobbes, 
because power was divided between King, Lords, and Commons. 

The supreme power, whether a man or an assembly, is called 
the Sovereign. The powers of the sovereign, in Hobbes's system, 
are unlimited. He has the right of censorship over all expression 
of opinion. It is assumed that his main interest is the preservation 
of internal peace, and that therefore he will not use the power of 
censorship to suppress truth, for a doctrine repugnant to peace 
cannot be true (A singularly pragmatisf view!) The laws of pro- 
perty are to be entirely subject to the sovereign; for in a state of 
nature there is no property, and therefore property is created by 
government, which may control its creation as it pleases. 

573 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

It is admitted that the sovereign may be despotic, but even the 
worst despotism is better than anarchy. Moreover, in many points 
the interests of the sovereign are identical with those of his subjects. 
He is richer if they are richer, safer if they are law-abiding, and 
so on. Rebellion is wrong, both because it usually fails, and because, 
if it succeeds, it sets a bad example, and teaches others to rebel. 
The Aristotelian distinction between tyranny and monarchy is 
rejected; a "tyranny," according to Hobbes, is merely a monarchy 
that the speaker happens to dislike. 

Various reasons are given for preferring government by a 
monarch to government by an assembly. It is admitted that the 
monarch will usually follow his private interest when it conflicts 
with that of the public, but so will an assembly. A monarch may 
have favourites, but so may even* member of an assembly; 
therefore the total number of favourites is likely to be fewer 
under a monarchy. A monarch can hear advice from anybody 
secretly; an assembly can only hear advice from its own members, 
and that publicly. In an assembly, the chance absence of some 
may cause a different party to obtain the majority, and thus 
produce a change of policy. Moreover, if the assembly is divided 
against itself, the result may be civil war. For all these reasons, 
Hobbes concludes, a monarchy is best. 

Throughout the Leviathan, Hobbes never considers the possible 
effect of periodical elections in curbing the tendency of assemblies 
to sacrifice the public interest to the private interest of their 
members. He seems, in fact, to be thinking, not of democratically 
elected Parliaments, but of bodies like the Grand Council in 
Venice or the House of Lords in England. He conceives demo- 
cracy, in the manner of antiquity, as involving the direct partici- 
pation of every citizen in legislation and administration; at least, 
this seems to be his view. 

The part of the people, in Hnhhes's system, ends completely 
with the first choice of a sovereign. The succession is to be deter- 
mined by the sovereign, as was the practice in the Roman Kmpire 
when mutinies did not interfere. It is admitted that the sovereign 
will usually choose one of his own children, or a near relative if 
he has no children, but it is held that no law ought to prevent him 
from choosing otherwise. 

There is a chapter on the liberty of subjects, which begins with 
an admirably precise definition : Liberty is the absence of external 

574 



HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

impediments to motion. In this sense, liberty is consistent with 
necessity; for instance, water necessarily flows down hill when 
there are no impediments to its motion, and when, therefore, 
according to the definition, it is free. A man is free to do what he 
wills, but necessitated to do what God wills. All our volitions have 
causes, and are in this sense necessary. As for the liberty of 
subjects, they are free where the laws do not interfere ; this is no 
limitation of sovereignty, since the laws could interfere if the 
sovereign so decided. Subjects have no rights as against the 
sovereign, except what the sovereign voluntarily concedes. When 
David caused Uriah to be killed, he did no injury to Uriah, because 
Uriah was his subject; but he did an injury to God, because he 
was God's subject and was disobeying God's law. 

The ancient authors, with their praises of liberty, have led men, 
according to Hobbes, to favour tumults and seditions. He main- 
tains that, when they are rightly interpreted, the liberty they 
praised was that of sovereigns, i.e. liberty from foreign domina- 
tion. Internal resistance to sovereigns he condemns even when it 
might seem most justified. For example, he holds that St. Ambrose 
had no right to excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius after 
the massacre of Thessalonica. And he vehemently censures Pope 
Zachary for having helped to depose the last of the Merovingians 
in favour of I'cpin. 

He admits, however, one limitation on the duty of submission 
to sovereigns. The right of self-preservation he regards as absolute, 
and subjects have the right of self-defence, even against monarchs. 
This is logical, since he has made self-preservation the motive for 
instituting government. On this ground he holds (though with 
limitations) that a man has a right to refuse to fight when called 
upon by the government to do so. This is a right which no modern 
government concedes. A curious result of his egoistic ethic is 
that resistance to the sovereign is only justified in w^-defence; 
resistance in defence of another is always culpable. 

There is one other quite logical exception: a man has no duty 
to a sovereign who has not the power to protect him. This justified 
Hobbes 's submission to Cromwell while Charles II was in exile. 

There must, of course, be no such bodies as political parties or 
what we should now call trade unions. All teachers are to be 
ministers of the sovereign, and are to teach only what the sovereign 
thinks useful. The rights of property are only valid as against 

575 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

other subjects, not as against the sovereign. The sovereign has the 
right to regulate foreign trade. He is not subject to the civil law. 
His right to punish comes to him, not from any concept of justice, 
but because he retains the liberty that all men had in the state of 
nature, when no man could be blamed for inflicting injury on 
another. 

There is an interesting list of the reasons (other than foreign 
conquest) for the dissolution of commonwealths. These are : giving 
too little power to the sovereign; allowing private judgment in 
subjects; the theory that everything that is against conscience is 
sin; the belief in inspiration; the doctrine that the sovereign is 
subject to civil laws; the recognition of absolute private property; 
division of the sovereign power; imitation of the Greeks and 
Romans; separation of temporal and spiritual powers; refusing 
the power of taxation to the sovereign ; the popularity of potent 
subjects; and the liberty of disputing with the sovereign. Of all 
these, there were abundant instances in the then recent history 
of England and France. 

There should not, Hobbes thinks, be much difficulty in teaching 
people to believe in the rights of the sovereign, for have they not 
been taught to believe in Christianity, and even in transubstantia- 
tion, which is contrary to reason? There should be days set apart 
for learning the duty of submission. The instruction of the people 
depends upon right teaching in the universities, which must 
therefore be carefully supervised. There must be uniformity of 
worship, the religion being that ordained by the sovereign. 

Part II ends with the hope that some sovereign will read the 
book and make himself absolute a less chimerical hope than 
Plato's, that some king would turn philosopher. Monarchs are 
assured that the book is easy reading and quite interesting. 

Part III, "Of a Christian Commonwealth," explains that there 
is no universal Church, because the Church must depend upon 
the civil government. In each country, the king must he head of 
the Church; the Pope's overlordship and infallibility cannot be 
admitted. It argues, as might be expected, that a Christian who 
is a subject of a non-Christian sovereign should yield outwardly, 
for was not Naaman suffered to bow himself in the house of 
Rimmon? 

Part IV, "Of the Kingdom of Darkness,'* is mainly concerned 
with criticism of the Church of Rome, which Hobbes hates 

57'' 



HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

because it puts the spiritual power above the temporal. The rest 
of this part is an attack on "vain philosophy," by which Aristotle 
is usually meant. 

Let us now try to decide what we are to think of the Leviathan. 
The question is not easy, because the good and the bad in it are 
so closely intermingled. 

In politics, there are two different questions, one as to the best 
form of the State, the other as to its powers. The best form of 
State, according to Hobbes, is monarchy, but this is not the 
important part of his doctrine. The important part is his con- 
tention that the powers of the State should be absolute. This 
doctrine, or something like it, had grown up in Western Europe 
during the Renaissance and the Reformation. First, the feudal 
nobility were cowed by Louis XI, Edward IV, Ferdinand and 
Isabella, and their successors. Then the Reformation, in Pro- 
testant countries, enabled the lay government to get the better 
of the Church. Henry VIII wielded a power such as no earlier 
English king had enjoyed. But in France the Reformation, at first, 
had the opposite effect; between the Guises and the Huguenots, 
the kings were nearly powerless. Henry IV and Richelieu, not 
long before Hobbes wrote, had laid the foundations of the absolute 
monarchy which lasted in France till the Revolution. In Spain, 
Charles V had got the better of the Cortes, and Philip II was 
absolute except in relation to the Church. In England, however, 
the Puritans had undone the work of Henry VIII; their work 
suggested to I lobbcs that anarchy must result from resistance to 
the sovereign. 

liven' community is faced with two dangers, anarchy and 
despotism. The Puritans, especially the Independents, were most 
impressed by the danger of despotism. Ilobbes, on the contrary, 
having experienced the conflict of rival fanaticisms, was obsessed 
hy the fear of anarchy. The liberal philosophers who arose after 
the Restoration, and acquired control after 1688, realized both 
dangers; they disliked both Strafford and the Anabaptists. This 
led Locke to the doctrine of division of powers, and of checks 
and balances. In England there was a real division of powers so 
long as the King had influence; then Parliament became supreme, 
and ultimately the Cabinet. In America, there are still checks and 
balances in so far as Congress and the Supreme Court can resist 
the Administration. In (Germany, Italy, Russia, and Japan, the 

/./<*y v/Hf.iffH /'Ai/oto/i-Jy 577 *^ 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

government has had even more power than Hobbes thought desir- 
able. On the whole, therefore, as regards the powers of the State, 
the world has gone as Hobbes wished, after a long liberal period 
during which, at least apparently, it was moving in the opposite 
direction. In spite of the outcome of the present war, it 
seems evident that the functions of the State must continue to 
increase, and that resistance to it must grow more and more 
difficult. 

The reason that Hobbes gives for supporting the State, namely 
that it is the only alternative to anarchy, is in the main a valid one. 
A State may, however, be so bad that temporary anarchy seems 
preferable to its continuance, as in France in 1789 and in Russia 
in 1917. Moreover, the tendency of every government towards 
tyranny cannot be kept in check unless governments have some 
fear of rebellion. Governments would be worse than they are if 
Hobbes 's submissive attitude were universally adopted by sub- 
jects. This is true in the political sphere, where governments will 
try, if they can, to make themselves personally irremovable ; it is 
true in the economic sphere, where they will try to enrich them- 
selves and their friends at the public expense; it is true in the 
intellectual sphere, where they will suppress every new discovery 
or doctrine that seems to menace their power. These are reasons 
for not thinking only of the risk of anarchy, but also of the danger 
of injustice and ossification that is bound up with omnipotence 
in government. 

The merits of Hobbes appear most clearly when he is contrasted 
with earlier political theorists. He is completely free from super- 
stition ; he does not argue from what happened to Adam and Eve 
at the time of the Fall. He is clear and logical; his ethics, right or 
wrong, is completely intelligible, and does not involve the use 
of any dubious concepts. Apart from Machiavelli, who is much 
more limited, he is the first really modern writer on political 
theory. Where he is wrong, he is wrong from over-simplification, 
not because the basis of his thought is unreal and fantastic. For 
this reason, he is still worth refuting. 

Without criticizing Hobbes's metaphysics or ethics, there are 
two points to make against him. The first is that he always con- 
siders the national interest as a whole, and assumes, tacitly, that 
the major interests of all citizens are the same. He does not realize 
the importance of the clash between different classes, which Marx 

578 



HOBBES'S LEVIATHAN 

makes the chief cause of social change. This is connected with the 
assumption that the interests of a monarch are roughly identical 
with those of his subjects. In time of war there is a unification of 
interests, especially if the war is fierce; but in time of peace the 
clash may be very great between the interests of one class and 
those of another. It is not by any means always true that, in such 
a situation, the best way to avert anarchy is to preach the absolute 
power of the sovereign. Some concession in the way of sharing 
power may be the only way to prevent civil war. This should have 
been obvious to I lobbes from the recent history of England. 

Another point in which Hobbes's doctrine is unduly limited is 
in regard to the relations between different States. There is not 
a word in Leviathan to suggest any relation between them except 
war and conquest, with occasional interludes. This follows, on 
his principles, from the absence of an international government, 
for the relations of States are still in a state of nature, which is 
that of a war of all against all. So long as there is international 
anarchy, it is by no means clear that increase of efficiency in the 
separate States is in the interest of mankind, since it increases 
the ferocity and destructiveness of war. Every argument that he 
adduces in favour of government, in so far as it is valid at all, is 
valid in favour of international government. So long as national 
States exist and fight each other, only inefficiency can preserve 
the human race. To improve the fighting quality of separate 
States without having any means of preventing war is the road 
to universal destruction. 



579 



Chapter IX 
DESCARTES 

K^N DESCARTES (1596-1650) is usually considered the 
founder of modern philosophy, and, I think, rightly. He 
is the first man of high philosophic capacity whose outlook 
is profoundly affected by the new physics and astronomy. While 
it is true that he retains much of scholasticism, he does not accept 
foundations laid by predecessors, but endeavours to construct a 
complete philosophic edifice de novo. This had not happened since 
Aristotle, and is a sign of the new self-confidence that resulted 
from the progress of science. There is a freshness about his work 
that is not to be found in any eminent previous philosopher since 
Plato. All the intermediate philosophers were teachers, with the 
professional superiority belonging to that avocation. Descartes 
writes, not as a teacher, but as a discoverer and explorer, anxious 
to communicate what he has found. His style is easy and un- 
pedantic, addressed to intelligent men of the world rather than 
to pupils. It is, moreover, an extraordinarily excellent style. It is 
very fortunate for modern philosophy that the pioneer had such 
admirable literary sense. His successors, both on the Continent 
and in England, until Kant, retain his unprofessional character, 
and several of them retain something of his stylistic merit. 

Descartes *s father was a councillor of the Parlemcnt of Brittany 
and possessed a moderate amount of landed property. When 
Descartes inherited, at his father's death, he sold his estates, and 
invested the money, obtaining an income of six or seven thousand 
francs a year. He was educated, from 1604 to 1612, at the Jesuit 
college of La Ffcche, which seems to have given him a much 
better grounding in modern mathematics than he could have 
got at most universities at that time. In 1612 he went to Paris, 
where he found social life boring, and retired to a secluded retreat 
in the Faubourg St. Germain, in which he worked at geometry. 
Friends nosed htm out, however, so, to secure more complete 
quiet, he enlisted in the Dutch army (1617). As Holland was at 
peace at the time, he seems to have enjoyed two years of undis- 
turbed meditation. However, the coming of the Thirty Years' 
War led him to enlist in the Bavarian army (1619). It was in 



DESCARTES 

Bavaria, during the winter 1619-20, that he had the experience 
he describes in the Discours de la Mtthode. The weather being 
cold, he got into a stove 1 in the morning, and stayed there all 
day meditating; by his own account, his philosophy was half 
finished when he came out, but this need not be accepted too 
literally. Socrates used to meditate all day in the snow, but 
Descartes's mind only worked when he was warm. 

In 1621 he gave up fighting; after a visit to Italy, he settled in 
Paris in 1625. But again friends would call on him before he was 
up (he seldom got up before midday), so in 1628 he joined the 
army which was besieging La Rochelle, the Huguenot stronghold. 
When this episode was finished, he decided to live in Holland, 
probably to escape the risk of persecution. He was a timid man, 
a practising Catholic, but he shared Galileo's heresies. Some 
think that he heard of the first (secret) condemnation of Galileo, 
which had taken place in 1616. However that may be, he decided 
not to publish a great book, Le Monde -, upon which he had been 
engaged. His reason was that it maintained two heretical doctrines: 
the earth's rotation and the infinity of the universe. (This book 
was never published in its entirety, but fragments of it were 
published after his death.) 

lie lived in Holland for twenty years (1629-49), except for a 
few brief visits to France and one to England, all on business. It 
is impossible to exaggerate the importance of Holland in the 
seventeenth century, as the one country where there was freedom 
of speculation. Hbbbes had to have his books printed there; 
Ix)cke took refuge there during the five worst years of reaction 
in England before 1688; Bayle (of the Dictionary) found it 
necessary to live there; and Spinoza would hardly have been 
allowed to do his work in any other country. 

I said that Descartes was a timid man, but perhaps it would be 
kinder to say that he wished to be left in peace so as to do his work 
undisturbed. He always courted ecclesiastics, especially Jesuits 
not only while he was in their power, but after his emigration to 
Holland. His psychology is obscure, but I incline to think that 
he was a sincere Catholic, and wished to persuade the Church 
in its own interests as well as in his to be less hostile to modern 

1 Descartes says it was a stove (pole) t but most commentators think 
this impossible. Those who know old-fashioned Bavarian houses, how* 
ever, anftiire me jhat it is entirely credible 

58' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

science than it showed itself in the case of Galileo. There 
are those who think that his orthodoxy was merely politic, 
but though this is a possible view I do not think it the most 
probable. 

Even in Holland he was subject to vexatious attacks, not by the 
Roman Church, but by Protestant bigots. It was said that his 
views led to atheism, and he would have been prosecuted but for 
the intervention of the French ambassador and the Prince of 
Orange. This attack having failed, another, less direct, was made 
a few years later by the authorities of the University of Leyden, 
which forbade all mention of him, whether favourable or un- 
favourable. Again the Prince of Orange intervened, and told the 
university not to be silly. This illustrates the pain to Protestant 
countries from the subordination of the Church to the State, and 
from the comparative weakness of Churches that were not 
international. 

Unfortunately, through Chanut, the French ambassador at 
Stockholm, Descartes got into correspondence with Queen 
Christina of Sweden, a passionate and learned lady who thought 
that, as a sovereign, she had a right to waste the time of great 
men. He sent her a treatise on love, a subject which until then he 
had somewhat neglected. Me also sent her a work on the passions 
of the soul, which he had originally composed for Princess 
Elizabeth, daughter of the Elector Palatine. These writings led 
her to request his presence at her court; he at last agreed, and she 
sent a warship to fetch him (September, 1649). It turned out that 
she wanted daily lessons from him, but could not spare the time 
except at five in the morning. This unaccustomed early rising, 
in the cold of a Scandinavian winter, was not the best thing for 
a delicate man. Moreover, Chanut became dangerously ill, and 
Descartes looked after him. The ambassador recovered, but 
Descartes fell ill and died in February, 1650. 

Descartes never married, but he had a natural daughter who 
died at the age of five; this was, he said, the greatest sorrow of his 
life. He always was well dressed, and wore a sword. He was not 
industrious; he worked short hours, and read little. When he went 
to Holland he took few books with him, but among them were 
the Bible and Thomas Aquinan. His work secrns to have been 
done with great concentration during short periods ; but perhaps, 
to keep up the appearance of a gentlemanly amateur, he may have 

58* 



DESCARTES 

pretended to work less than in fact he did, for otherwise his 
achievements seem scarcely credible. 

Descartes was a philosopher, a mathematician, and a man of 
science. In philosophy and mathematics, his work was of supreme 
importance; in science, though creditable, it was not so good as 
that of some of his contemporaries. 

His great contribution to geometry was the invention of co- 
ordinate geometry, though not quite in its final form. He used the 
analytic method, which supposes a problem solved, and examines 
the consequences of the supposition; and he applied algebra to 
geometry. In both of these he had had predecessors as regards 
the former, even among the ancients. What was original in him 
was the use of co-ordinates, i.e. the determination of the position 
of a point in a plane by its distance from two fixed lines. He 
did not himself discover all the power of this method, but he did 
enough to make further progress easy. This was by no means his 
sole contribution to mathematics, but it was his most important. 

The book in which he set forth most of his scientific theories 
was Principia Phifasophiae, published in 1644. There were, how- 
ever, some other books of importance: Essais philosopluques (1637) 
deals with optics as well as geometry, and one of his books is 
called I)e la formation du foetus. He welcomed Harvey's discovery 
of the circulation of the blood, and was always hoping (though 
in vain) to make some discovery of importance in medicine. He 
regarded the bodies of men and animals as machines; animals he 
regarded as automata, governed entirely by the laws of physics, 
and devoid of feeling or consciousness. Men arc different: they 
have a soul, which resides in the pineal gland. There the soul 
comes in contact with the "vital spirits, 11 and through this contact 
there is interaction between soul and body. The total quantity of 
motion in the universe is constant, and therefore the soul cannot 
affect it ; but it can alter the direction of motion of the vital spirits, 
and hence, indirectly, of other parts of the body. 

This part of his theory was abandoned by his school first by 
his Dutch disciple Geulincx, and later by Malebranche and 
Spinoza. The physicists discovered the conservation of momentum, 
according to which the total quantity of motion in the world in 
any given direction is constant. This showed that the sort of action 
of mind on matter that Descartes imagined is impossible. Assum- 
ing as was very generally assumed in the Cartesian school that 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

all physical action is of the nature of impact, dynamical laws 
suffice to determine the motions of matter, and there is no room 
for any influence of mind. But this raises a difficulty. My arm 
moves when I will that it shall move, but my will is a mental 
phenomenon and the motion of my arm a physical phenomenon. 
Why then, if mind and matter cannot interact, does my body 
behave as if my mind controlled it ? To this Geulincx invented 
an answer, known as the theory of the "two clocks." Suppose you 
have two clocks which both keep perfect time: whenever one 
points to the hour, the other will strike, so that if you saw one 
and heard the other, you would think the one caused the other 
to strike. So it is with mind and body. tach is wound up by God 
to keep time with the other, so that, on occasion of my volition, 
purely physical laws cause my arm to move, although my will 
has not really acted on my body. 

There were of course difficulties in this theory. In the first 
place, it was very odd; in the second place, since the physical 
series was rigidly determined by natural laws, the mental series, 
which ran parallel to it, must be equally deterministic. If the 
theory was valid, there should be a sort of possible dictionary, in 
which each cerebral occurrence would be translated into the 
corresponding mental occurrence. An ideal calculator could 
calculate the cerebral occurrence by the laws of dynamics, and 
infer the concomitant mental occurrence by means of the "dic- 
tionary." Even without the "dictionary," the calculator could 
infer words and actions, since these are bodily movements. This 
view would be difficult to reconcile with Christian ethics and the 
punishment of sin. 

These consequences, however, were not at once apparent. 
The theory appeared to have two merits. The first was that it 
made the soul, in a sense, wholly independent of the body, since 
it was never acted on by the body. The second was that it allowed 
the general principle: "one substance cannot act on another/' 
There were two substances, mind and matter, and they were so 
dissimilar that an interaction seemed inconceivable. Geulincx *s 
theory explained the appearance of interaction while denying it? 



In mechanics, Descartes accepts the first law of motion, accord- 
ing to which a body left to itself will move with constant velocity 
in a straight line. But there is no action at a distance, as later in 

584 



DESCARTES 

Newton's theory of gravitation. There is no such thing as a vacuum, 
and there are no atoms; yet all interaction is of the nature of 
impact. If we knew enough, we should be able to reduce chemistry 
and biology to mechanics; the process by which a seed develops 
into an animal or a plant is purely mechanical. There is no need 
of Aristotle's three souls ; only one of them, the rational soul, exists, 
and that only in man. 

With due caution to avoid theological censure, Descartes 
develops a cosmogony not unlike those of some pre-Platonic 
philosophers. We know, he says, that the world was created as 
in Genesis, but it is interesting to see how it might have grown 
naturally. lie works out a theory of the formation of vortices: 
round the sun there is an immense vortex in the plenum, which 
carries the planets round with it. The theory is ingenious, but 
cannot explain why planetary orbits are elliptical, not circular. It 
was generally accepted in France, where it was only gradually 
ousted by the Newtonian theory. Cotes, the editor of the first 
English edition of Newton's Principia, argues eloquently that the 
vortex theory leads to atheism, while Newton's requires God to 
set the planets in motion in a direction not towards the sun. On 
this ground, he thinks, Newton is to be preferred. 

I come now to Descartes 's two most important books, so far as 
pure philosophy is concerned. These are the Discourse on Method 
(1637) and the Meditations (1642). They largely overlap, and it is 
not necessary to keep them apart. 

In these books Descartes begins by explaining the method of 
"Cartesian doubt," as it has come to be called. In order to have 
a firm basis for his philosophy, he resolves to make himself doubt 
even-thing that he can manage to doubt. As he foresees that the 
process may take some time, he resolves, in the meanwhile, to 
regulate his conduct by commonly received rules; this will leave 
his mind unhampered by the possible consequences of his doubts 
in relation to practice. 

He begins with scepticism in regard to the senses. Can I doubt, 
he says, that I am sitting here by the fire in a dressing-gown? 
Yes, for sometimes I have dreamt that ^ was hej; 
I was naked in bed. (Pyjamas, and even night 
been invented.) Moreover madmen sometimr 
so it is possible that I may be in like case. 

Dreams, however, like painters, present 

585 




WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

things, at least as regards their elements. (You may dream of a 
winged horse, but only because you have seen horses and wings.) 
Therefore corporeal nature in general, involving such matters as 
extension, magnitude, and number, is less easy to question than 
beliefs about particular things. Arithmetic and geometry, which 
are not concerned with particular things, are therefore more 
certain than physics and astronomy; they are true even of dream 
objects, which do not differ from real ones as regards number 
and extension. Even in regard to arithmetic and geometry, how- 
ever, doubt is possible. It may be that God causes me to make 
mistakes whenever I try to count the sides of a square or add 2 to 3. 
Perhaps it is wrong, even in imagination, to attribute such unkind- 
ness to God, but there might be an evil demon, no less cunning 
and deceitful than powerful, employing all his industry in mis- 
leading me. If there be such a demon, it may he that all the things 
Tsee are only illusions of which he makes use as traps for my 
credulity. 

There remains, however, something that I cannot doubt: no 
demon, however cunning, could deceive me if I did not exist. I 
may have no body: this might be an illusion. But thought is 
different. "While I wanted to think everything false, it must 
necessarily be that I who thought was something; and remarking 
that this truth, / think, therefore I am, was so solid and so certain 
that all the most extravagant suppositions of the sceptics were 
incapable of upsetting it, I judged that I could receive it without 
scruple as the first principle of the philosophy that I sought. M| 

This passage is the kernel of Descartes *s theory of knowledge, 
and contains what is most important in his philosophy. Most 
philosophers since Descartes have attached importance to the 
theory of knowledge, and their doing so is largely due to him. 41 1 
think, therefore I am" makes mind more certain than matter, 
and my mind (for me) more certain than the minds of others. 
There is thus, in all philosophy derived from Descartes, a ten- 
dency to subjectivism, and to regarding matter as something only 
knowable, if at all, by inference from what is known of mind. 
These two tendencies ?xist both in Continental idealism and in 
British empiricism in the former triumphantly, in the latter 

1 The above argument, "I think, therefore 1 am*' (cofftlo ergo nun), is 
known as Descartes ' cogito t and the process by which it i* reached is 
called "Cartesian doubt," 



DESCARTES 

regretfully. There has been, in quite recent times, an attempt to 
escape from this subjectivism by the philosophy known as instru- 
mentalism, but of this I will not speak at present. With this 
exception, modern philosophy has very largely accepted the for- 
mulation of its problems from Descartes, while not accepting his 
solutions. 

The reader will remember that St. Augustine advanced an 
argument closely similar to the cogito. He did not, however, give 
prominence to it, and the problem which it is intended to solve 
occupied only a small part of his thoughts. Descartes 's originality, 
therefore, should be admitted, though it consists less in inventing 
the argument than in perceiving its importance. 

Having now secured a firm foundation, Descartes sets to work 
to rebuild the edifice of knowledge. The I that has been proved 
to exist has been inferred from the fact that I think, therefore I 
exist while I think, and only then. If I ceased to think, there 
would be no evidence of my existence. I am a thing that thinks, 
a substance of which the whole nature or essence consists in 
thinking, and which needs no place or material thing for its 
existence. The soul, therefore, is wholly distinct from the body 
and easier to know than the body; it would be what it is even if 
there were no body. 

Descartes next asks himself: why is the cogito so evident? He 
concludes that it is only because it is clear and distinct. He there- 
fore adopts as a general rule the principle: All things that we con- 
ceive very clearly and rerv distinctly are true. He admits, however, 
that there is sometimes difficulty in knowing which these things 
are. 

"Thinking" is used by Descartes in a very wide sense. A thing 
that thinks, he says, is one that doubts, understands, conceives, 
aftirms, denies, wills, imagines, and feels for feeling, as it occurs 
in dreams, is a form of thinking. Since thought is the essence of 
mind, the mind must always think, even during deep sleep. 

Descartes now resumes the question of our knowledge of bodies. 
I le takes as an example a piece of wax from the honeycomb. 
Certain things are apparent to the senses: it tastes of honey, it 
smells of (lowers, it has a certain sensibfe colour, size and shape, 
it is hard and cold, and if struck it emits a sound. But if you put 
it near the fire, these qualities change, although the wax persists, 
therefore what appeared to the senses was nor the wax itself. 

587 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The wax itself is constituted by extension, flexibility, and motion, 
which are understood by the mind, not by the imagination. The 
thing that is the wax cannot itself be sensible, since it is equally 
involved in all the appearances of the wax to the various senses. 
The perception of the wax "is not a vision or touch or imagination, 
but an inspection of the imnd." I do not sec the wax, any more 
than I see men in the street when I see hats and coats. "I under- 
stand by the sole power of judgment, which resides in my mind, 
what I thought I saw with my eyes." Knowledge by the senses is 
confused, and shared with animals; but now I have stripped the 
wax of its clothes, and mentally perceive it naked. From my 
sensibly seeing the wax, my own existence follows with certainty, 
but not that of the wax. Knowledge of external things must be 
by the mind, not by the senses. 

This leads to a consideration of different kinds of ideas. The 
commonest of errors, Descartes says, is to think that my ideas are 
like outside things. (The word "idea" includes sense-perceptions, 
as used by Descartes.) Ideas seem to be of three sorts: (i) those 
that are innate, (2) those that are foreign and come from without, 
(3) those that are invented by me. The second kind of ideas, we 
naturally suppose, are like outside objects. We suppose this, 
partly because nature teaches us to think so, partly because such 
ideas come independently of the will (i.e. through sensation), and 
it therefore seems reasonable to suppose that a foreign thing 
imprints its likeness on me. But are these good reasons? When 1 
speak of being "taught by nature" in this connection, I only 
mean that I have a certain inclination to believe it, not that I see 
it by a natural light. What is seen by a natural light cannot be 
denied, but a mere inclination may be towards what is false. And 
as for ideas of sense being involuntary, that is no argument, for 
dreams are involuntary although they come from within. The 
reasons for supposing that ideas of sense come from without are 
therefore inconclusive. 

Moreover there are sometimes two different ideas of the same 
external object, e.g., the sun as it appears to the senses and the 
sun in which the astronomers believe. These cannot both be like 
the sun, and reason shows that the one which comes directly 
from experience must be the less like it of the two. 

But these considerations have not disposed of the sceptical 
arguments which threw doubt on the existence of the external 



DESCARTES 

world. This can only be done by first proving the existence of God. 

Descartes's proofs of the existence of God are not very original ; 
in the main they come from scholastic philosophy. They were 
better stated by Leibniz, and I will omit consideration of them 
until we come to him. 

When God's existence has been proved, the rest proceeds easily. 
Since God is good, He will not act like the deceitful demon whom 
Descartes has imagined as a ground for doubt. Now God has 
given me such a strong inclination to believe in bodies that He 
would be deceitful if there were none ; therefore bodies exist. He 
must, moreover, have given me the faculty of correcting errors. 
I use this faculty when I employ the principle that what is clear 
and distinct is true. This enables me to know mathematics, and 
physics also, if 1 remember that I must know the truth about 
bodies by the mind alone, not by mind and body jointly. 

The constructive part of Descartes's theory of knowledge is 
much less interesting than the earlier destructive part. It uses all 
sorts of scholastic maxims, such as that an effect can never have 
more perfection than its cause, which have somehow escaped the 
initial critical scrutiny. No reason is given for accepting these 
maxims, although they are certainly less self-evident than one's 
own existence, which is proved with a flourish of trumpets. Plato, 
St. Augustine, and St. Thomas contain most of what is affirmative 
in the Meditations. 

The method of critical doubt, though Descartes himself applied 
it only half-heartedly, was of great philosophic importance. It is 
clear, as a matter of logic, that it can only yield positive results if 
scepticism is to stop somewhere. If there is to be both logical and 
empirical knowledge, there must be two kinds of stopping points: 
indubitable facts, and indubitable principles of inference. Des- 
cartes 's indubitable facts arc his own thoughts using "thought" 
in the widest possible sense. 44 I think" is his ultimate premiss. 
Here the word "I 11 is really illegitimate; he ought to state his 
ultimate premiss in the form "there are thoughts." The word "I" 
is grammatically convenient, but does not describe a datum. 
When he goes on to say "I am a thing which thinks/' he is already 
using uncritically the apparatus of categories handed down by 
scholasticism. He nowhere proves that thoughts need a thinker, 
nor is there reason to believe this except in a grammatical sense. 
The decision, however, to regard thoughts rather than external 

59 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

objects as the prime empirical certainties was very important, 
and had a profound effect on all subsequent philosophy. 

In two other respects the philosophy of Descartes was important. 
First: it brought to completion, or very nearly to completion, the 
dualism of mind and matter which began with Plato and was 
developed, largely for religious reasons, by Christian philosophy. 
Ignoring the curious transactions in the pineal gland, which were 
dropped by the followers of Descartes, the Cartesian system 
presents two parallel but independent worlds, that of mind and 
that of matter, each of which can be studied without reference to 
the other. That the mind does not move the body was a new idea, 
due explicitly to Geulincx but implicitly to Descartes. It had the 
advantage of making it possible to say that the body does not 
move the mind. There is a considerable discussion in the Medi- 
tations as to why the mind feels "sorrow" when the body is 
thirsty. The correct Cartesian answer was that the body and the 
mind were like two clocks, and that when one indicated "thirst" 
the other indicated "sorrow." From the religious point of view, 
however, there was a grave drawback to this theory; and this 
brings me to the second characteristic of Cartesianism that I 
alluded to above. 

In the whole theory of the material world, Cartesianism was 
rigidly deterministic. Living organisms, just as much as dead 
matter, were governed by the laws of physics; there was no longer 
need, as in the Aristotelian philosophy, of an entelechy or soul to 
explain the growth of organisms and the movements of animals. 
Descartes himself allowed one small exception: a human soul 
could, by volition, alter the direction though not the quantity of 
the motion of the vital spirits. This, however, was contrary to the 
spirit of the system, and turned out to be contrary to the laws of 
mechanics; it was therefore dropped. The consequence was that 
all the movements of matter were determined by physical laws, 
and, owing to parallelism, mental events must be equally deter- 
minate. Consequently Cartesians had difficulty about free will. 
And for those who paid more attention to Descartes *s science than 
to his theory of knowledge, it was not difficult to extend the theory 
that animals are automate: why not say the same of men, and 
simplify the system by making it a consistent materialism ? This 
step was actually taken in the eighteenth century. 

There is in Descartes an unresolved dualism between what he 

59* 



DESCARTES 

learnt from contemporary science and the scholasticism that he 
had been taught at La Fltche. This led him into inconsistencies, 
but it also made him more rich in fruitful ideas than any com- 
pletely logical philosopher could have been. Consistency might 
have made him merely the founder of a new scholasticism, whereas 
inconsistency made him the source of two important but divergent 
schools of philosophy. 



59' 



Chapter X 
SPINOZA 

SPINOZA (1634-77) is the noblest and most lovable of the 
great philosophers, Intellectually, some others have sur- 
passed him, but ethically he is supreme. As a natural conse- 
quence, he was considered, during his lifetime and for a century 
after his death, a man of appalling wickedness. Fie was born a 
Jew, but the Jews excommunicated him. Christians abhorred him 
equally; although his whole philosophy is dominated by the idea 
of God, the orthodox accused him of atheism. Leibniz, who owed 
much to him, concealed his debt, and carefully abstained from 
saying a word in his praise; he even went so far as to lie about 
the extent of his personal acquaintance with the heretic Jew. 

The life of Spinoza was very simple. His family had come to 
Holland from Spain, or perhaps Portugal, to escape the Inquisi- 
tion. He himself was educated in Jewish learning, but found it 
impossible to remain orthodox. He was offered 1000 florins a year 
to conceal his doubts; when he refused, an attempt was made to 
assassinate him; when this failed, he was cursed with all the 
curses in Deuteronomy and with the curse that Elisha pro- 
nounced on the children who, in consequence, were torn to pieces 
by the she-bears. But no she-bears attacked Spinoza. He lived 
quietly, first at Amsterdam and then at the Hague, making his 
living by polishing lenses. His wants were few and simple, and 
he showed throughout his life a rare indifference to money. The 
few who knew him loved him, even if they disapproved of his 
principles. The Dutch Government, with its usual liberalism, 
tolerated his opinions on theological matters, though at one time 
he was in bad odour politically because he sided with the De Witts 
against the House of Orange. At the early age of forty-three he 
died of phthisis. 

His chief work, the Ethics, was published posthumously. Before 
considering it, a few words must be said about two of his other 
books, the Tractatus Theolbgico-Politicu* and the Tractatus Politicu*. 
The former is a curious combination of biblical criticism and 
political theory; the latter deals with political theory only. In 
biblical criticism Spinoza partially anticipates modern view*, 

592 



SPINOZA 

particularly in assigning much later dates to various books of the 
Old Testament than those assigned by tradition. He endeavours 
throughout to show that the Scriptures can be interpreted so as 
to be compatible with a liberal theology. 

Spinoza's political theory is, in the main, derived from Hobbes, 
in spite of the enormous temperamental difference between the 
two men. He holds that in a state of nature there is no right or 
wrong, for wrong consists in disobeying the law. He holds that 
the sovereign can do no wrong, and agrees with Hobbes that the 
Church should be entirely subordinate to the State. He is opposed 
to all rebellion, even against a bad government, and instances the 
troubles in England as a proof of the harm that comes of forcible 
resistance to authority. But he disagrees with Hobbes in thinking 
democracy the "most natural" form of government. He disagrees 
also in holding that subjects should not sacrifice all their rights 
to the sovereign. In particular, he holds freedom of opinion 
important. I do not quite know how he reconciles this with the 
opinion that religious questions should be decided by the State. 
I think when he says this he means that they should be decided 
by the State rather than the Church; in Holland the State was 
much more tolerant than the Church. 

Spinoza's Ethics deals with three distinct matters. It begins with 
metaphysics; it then goes on to the psychology of the passions 
and the will ; and finally it sets forth an ethic based on the pre- 
ceding metaphysics and psychology. The metaphysic is a modi- 
fication of Descartes, the psychology is reminiscent of Hobbes, 
hut the ethic is original, and is what is of most value in the book. 
The relation of Spinoza to Descartes is in some ways not unlike 
the relation of Plotinus to Plato. Descartes was a many-sided man, 
full of intellectual curiosity, but not much burdened with moral 
earnestness. Although he invented "proofs intended to support 
orthodox beliefs, he could have been used by sceptics as Carneades 
used Plato. Spinoza, although he was not without scientific 
interests, and even wrote a treatise on the rainbow, was in the 
main concerned with religion and virtue. He accepted from 
Descartes and his contemporaries a materialistic and deterministic 
physics, and sought, within this fraifiework, to find room for 
reverence and a life devoted to the Good. His attempt was mag- 
nificent, and rouses admiration even in those who do not think it 
successful 

593 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The metaphysical system of Spinoza is of the type inaugurated 
by Parmenides. There is only one substance, "God or Nature"; 
nothing finite is self-subsistent. Descartes admitted three sub- 
stances, God and mind and matter; it is true that, even for him, 
God was, in a sense, more substantial than mind and matter, 
since He had created them, and could, if He chose, annihilate 
them. But except in relation to God's omnipotence, mind and 
matter were two independent substances, defined, respectively, 
by the attributes of thought and extension. Spinoza would have 
none of this. For him, thought and extension were both attributes 
of God. God has also an infinite number of other attributes, 
since He must be in every respect infinite; but these others are 
unknown to us. Individual souls and separate pieces of matter 
are, for Spinoza, adjectival ; they are not things, but merely aspects 
of the divine Being. There can be no such personal immortality 
as Christians believe in, but only that impersonal sort that consists 
in becoming more and more one with God. Finite things are 
defined by their boundaries, physical or logical, that is to say, by 
what they are not: "all determination is negation/' There can be 
only one Being who is wholly positive, and He must be absolutely 
infinite. Hence Spinoza is led to a complete and undiluted 
pantheism. 

Everything, according to Spinoza, is ruled by an absolute logical 
necessity. There is no such thing as free will in the mental sphere 
or chance in the physical world. Everything that happens is a 
manifestation of God's inscrutable nature, and it is logically 
impossible that events should be other than they are. This leads 
to difficulties in regard to sin, which critics were not slow to 
point out. One of them, observing that, according to Spinoza, 
everything is decreed by God and is therefore good, asks indig- 
nantly: Was it good that Nero should kill his mother? Was it 
good that Adam ate the apple? Spinoza answers that what was 
positive in these acts was good, and only what was negative was 
bad; but negation exists only from the point of view of finite 
creatures. In God, who alone is completely real, there is no 
negation, and therefore the evil in what to us seem sins does not 
exist when they are viewed as parts of the whole. This doctrine, 
thought in one form or another, it has been held by most mystics, 
cannot, obviously, be reconciled with the orthodox doctrine of 
jtn and damnation It is bound up with Spinoza's complete 

594 



SPINOZA 

rejection of free will. Although not at all polemical, Spinoza was 
too honest to conceal his opinions, however shocking to contem- 
poraries; the abhorrence of his teaching is therefore not 
surprising. 

The Ethic* is set forth in the style of Euclid, with definitions, 
axioms, and theorems; everything after the axioms is supposed to 
be rigorously demonstrated by deductive argument. This makes 
him difficult reading. A modern student, who cannot suppose 
that there are rigorous "proofs** of such things as he professes 
to establish, is bound to grow impatient with the detail of the 
demonstrations, which is, in fact, not worth masterin . It is 
enough to read the enunciations of the propositions, and to study 
the scholia, which contain much of what is best in the Ethics. 
But it would show a lack of understanding to blame Spinoza for 
his geometrical method. It was of the essence of his system, 
ethically as well as metaphysically, to maintain that everything 
could be demonstrated, and it was therefore essential to produce 
demonstrations. We cannot accept his method, but that is because 
we cannot accept his metaphysic. We cannot believe that the 
interconnections of the parts of the universe are logical, because 
we hold that scientific laws are to be discovered by observation, 
not by reasoning alone. But for Spinoza the geometrical method 
was necessary, and was bound up with the most essential parts of 
his doctrine. 

I come now to Spinoza *s theory of the emotions. This comes 
after a metaphysical discussion of the nature and origin of the 
mind, which leads up to the astonishing proposition that "the 
human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and 
infinite essence of God." But the passions, which are discussed 
in the Third Book of the Ethics, distract us and obscure our 
intellectual vision of the whole. "Everything," we are told, "in 
so far as it is in itself, endeavours to persevere in its own being/ 9 
Hence arise love and hate and strife. The psychology of Book 111 
is entirely egoistic. "He who conceives that the object of his hate 
is destroyed will feel pleasure." "If we conceive that anyone takes 
delight in something, which only one person can possess, we 
shall endeavour to bring it about, thai the man in question shall 
not gain possession thereof/' But even in this Book there are 
moments when Spinoza abandons the appearance of mathe- 
matically demonstrated cynicism, as when he says: "Hatred is 

595 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

increased by being reciprocated, and can on the other hand be 
destroyed by love." Self-preservation is the fundamental motive 
of the passions, according to Spinoza; but self-preservation alters 
its character when we realize that what is real and positive in 
us is what unites us to the whole, and not what preserves the 
appearance of separateness. 

The last two books of the Ethics, entitled respectively "Ot 
human bondage, or the strength of the emotions" and "Of the 
power of the understanding, or of human freedom," are the most 
interesting. We are in bondage in proportion as what happens to 
us is determined by outside causes, and we are free in proportion 
as we are self-determined. Spinoza, like Socrates and Plato, 
believes that all wrong action is due to intellectual error: the 
man who adequately understands his own circumstances will act 
wisely, and will even be happy in the face of what to another 
would be misfortune. He makes no appeal to unselfishness; he 
holds that self-seeking, in some sense, and more particularly self- 
preservation, govern all human behaviour. "No virtue can be con- 
ceived as prior to this endeavour to preserve one's own being/' 
But his conception of what a wise man will choose as the goal of 
his self-seeking is different from that of the ordinary egoist: "The 
mind's highest good is the knowledge of God, and the mind's 
highest virtue is to know God." Emotions are called "passions" 
when they spring from inadequate ideas; passions in different 
men may conflict, but men who live in obedience to reason will 
agree together. Pleasure in itself is good, but hope and fear are 
bad, and so are humility and repentance: "he who repents of an 
action is doubly wretched or infirm." Spinoza regards time as 
unreal, and therefore all emotions which have to do essentially 
with an event as future or as past are contrary to reason. "In so 
far as the mind conceives a thing under the dictate of reason, 
it is affected equally, whether the idea be of a thing present, past, 
or future/ 9 

This is a hard saying, but it is of the essence of Spinoza's 
system, and we shall do well to dwell upon it for a moment. In 
popular estimation, "all's well that ends well"; if the universe is 
gradually improving, we think better of it than if it is gradually 
deteriorating, even if the sum of good and evil be the same in the 
two cases. We are more concerned about a disaster in our own 
tune than in the time of Jeaghiz Khan. According to Spinoza 

596 



SPINOZA 

this is irrational. Whatever happens is part of the eternal timeless 
world as God sees it; to Him, the date is irrelevant. The wise 
man, so far as human finitude allows, endeavours to see the 
world as God sees it, sub specie aternitatis, under the aspect of 
eternity. But, you may retort, we are surely right in being more 
concerned about future misfortunes, which may possibly be 
averted, than about past calamities about which we can do nothing/ 
To this argument Spinoza's determinism supplies the answer. 
Only ignorance makes us think that we can alter the future; what 
will be will be, and the future is as unalterably fixed as the past. 
That is why hope and fear are condemned: both depend upon 
viewing the future as uncertain, and therefore spring from lack of 
wisdom. 

When we acquire, in so far as we can, a vision of the world which 
is analogous to God's, we see everything as pan of the whole, 
and as necessary to the goodness of the whole. Therefore "the 
knowledge of evil is an inadequate knowledge.'* God has no 
knowledge of evil, because there is no evil to be known; the 
appearance of evil only arises through regarding parts of the 
universe as if they were self- subsis tent. 

Spinoza's outlook is intended to liberate men from the tyranny 
of fear. "A free man thinks of nothing less than of death; and his 
wisdom is a meditation not of death, but of life." Spinoza lived up 
to this precept very completely. On the last day of his life he was 
entirely calm, not exalted, like Socrates in the Phaedo, but con- 
versing, as he would on any other day, about matters of interest 
to his interlocutor. Unlike some other philosophers, he not 
only believed his own doctrines, but practised them; I do not 
know of any occasion, in spite of great provocation, in which he 
was betrayed into the kind of heat or anger that his ethic con- 
demned: In controversy he was courteous and reasonable, never 
denouncing, but doing his utmost to persuade. 

In so far as what happens to us springs from ourselves, it is 
good ; o*Iy what comes from without is bad for us. "As all things 
whereof a man is the efficient cause are necessarily good, no evil 
can befall a man except through external causes." Obviously, 
therefore, nothing bad can happen to the universe as a whole, 
since it is not subject to external causes. "We are a part of uni- 
versal nature, and we follow her order. If we have a dear and dis- 
tinct understanding of this, that part of our nature which is defined 

597 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

by intelligence, in other words the better part of ourselves, will 
assuredly acquiesce in what befalls us, and in such acquiescence 
will endeavour to persist/ 9 In so far as a man is an unwilling part 
of a larger whole, he is in bondage; but in so far as, through the 
understanding, he has grasped the sole reality of the whole, he is 
free. The implications of this doctrine are developed in the last 
Bookofthe&ta*. 

Spinoza does not, like the Stoics, object to all emotions; he 
objects only to those that are "passions," i.e. those in which we 
appear to ourselves to be passive in the power of outside forces. 
"An emotion which is a passion ceases to be a passion as soon as 
we form a clear and distinct idea of it." Understanding that all 
things are necessary helps the mind to acquire power over the 
emotions. "He who clearly and distinctly understands himself 
and his emotions, loves God, and so much the more as he more 
understands himself and his emotions.** This proposition intro- 
duces us to the "intellectual love of God/' in which wisdom 
consists. The intellectual love of God is a union of thought and 
emotion : it consists, I think one may say, in true thought combined 
with joy in the apprehension of truth. Ail joy in true thought is 
part of the intellectual love of God, for it contains nothing negative, 
and is therefore truly part of the whole, not only apparently, as 
are fragmentary things so separated in thought as to appear bad. 

I said a moment ago that the intellectual love of God involves 
joy, but perhaps this was a mistake, for Spinoza says that God is 
not affected by any emotion of pleasure or pain, and also says 
that "the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the 
infinite love wherewith God loves himself." I think, nevertheless, 
that there is something in "intellectual Imt" which is not mere 
intellect; perhaps the joy involved is considered as something 
superior to pleasure. 

"Love towards God," we are told, "must hold the chief place 
in the mind." I have omitted Spinoza's demonstrations, but in so 
doing I have given an incomplete picture of his thought. As the 
proof of the above proposition is short, I will quote it in full; 
the reader can then in imagination supply proofs to other propo- 
sitions. The proof of the above proposition is as follows : 

"For this love is associated with all the modifications of the body 
(V, 14) and is fostered by them all (V, 1 5) ; therefore ( V 1 1 ) it must 
hold the chief place in the mind. Q.E.D ' 

598 



SPINOZA 

Of the propositions referred to in the above proof, V, 14 states: 
"The mind can bring it about, that all bodily modifications or 
images of things may be referred to the idea of God"; V, 15, 
quoted above, states: "He who clearly and distinctly understands 
himself and his emotions loves God, and so much the more in 
proportion as he understands himself and his emotions"; V, n 
states: "In proportion as a mental image is referred to more 
objects, so is it more frequent, or more often vivid, and occupies 
the mind more/' 

The "proof" quoted above might be expressed as follows: 
Every increase in the understanding of what happens to us con- 
sists in referring events to the idea of God, since, in truth, every- 
thing is part of God. This understanding of everything as part 
of God is love of God, When all objects are referred to God, the 
idea of God mil fully occupy the mind. 

Thus the statement that "love of God must hold the chief place 
in the mind" is not a primarily moral exhortation, but an account 
of what must inevitably happen as we acquire understanding. 

We are told that no one can hate God, but, on the other hand, 
"he who loves God cannot endeavour that God should love him 
in return/' Goethe, who admired Spinoza without even beginning 
to understand him, thought this proposition an instance of self- 
abnegation. It is nothing of the sort, but a logical consequence 
of Spinoza's metaphysic. He does not say that a man ought not to 
want Cod to love him; he says that a man who loves God cannot 
want God to love him. This is made plain by the proof, which 
says: "For, if a man should so endeavour, he would desire (V, 
17, Corol.) that God, whom he loves, should not be God, and 
consequently he would desire to feel pain (III, 19), which is 
absurd (III, 28)." V, 17 is the proposition already referred to, 
which says that God has no passions or pleasures or pains; the 
corollary referred to above deduces that God loves and hates no 
one. Here again what is involved is not an ethical precept, but 
a logical necessity: a man who loved God and wished God to 
love htm would be wishing to feel pain, "which is absurd." 

The statement that God can love no one should not be con* 
stderrd to contradict the statement that God loves Himself with 
an infinite intellectual love. He may love Himself, since that is 
possible without false belief; and in any case intellectual love is 
a very special kind of love. 

S99 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

At this point Spinoza tells us that he has now given us "all the 
remedies against the emotions." The great reme4 is clear and 
distinct ideas as to the nature of the emotions and their relation 
to external causes. There is a further advantage in love of God 
as compared to love of human beings: "Spiritual unhealthiness 
and misfortunes can generally be traced to excessive love of 
something which is subject to many variations." But clear and 
distinct knowledge "begets a love towards a thing immutable 
and eternal/ 9 and such love has not the turbulent and disquieting 
character of love for an object which is transient and changeable. 

Although personal survival after death is an illusion, there is 
nevertheless something in the human mind that is eternal. The 
mind can only imagine or remember while the body endures, 
but there is in God an idea which expresses the essence of this or 
that human body under the form of eternity, and this idea is the 
eternal part of the mind. The intellectual love of God, when 
experienced by an individual, is contained in this eternal part 
of the mind. 

Blessedness, which consists of love towards God, is not the 
reward of virtue, but virtue itself; ue do not rejoice in it because 
we control our lusts, but we control our lusts because we rejoice 
in it. 

The Ethics ends with these words: 

"The wise man, in so far as he is regarded as such, is scarcely 
at all disturbed in spirit, but being conscious of himself, and ol 
God, and of things, by a certain eternal necessity, never ceases to 
be, but always possesses true acquiescence of his spirit. If the way 
which I have pointed out as leading to this result seems exceedingly 
hard, it may nevertheless be discovered. Needs must it be hard, 
since it is so seldom found. How would it be possible, if salvation 
were ready to our hand, and could without great labour be found, 
that it should be by almost all men neglected ? But all excellent 
things are as difficult as they are rare." 

In forming a critical estimate of Spinoza's importance as a 
philosopher, it is necessary to distinguish his ethics from his 
metaphysics, and to consider how much of the former can survive 
the rejection of the latter. ' 

Spinoza's metaphysic is the best example of what may be 
called "logical monism" the doctrine, namely, that the world 
as a whole is a single substance, none of whose parts are logically 

600 



SPINOZA 

capable of existing alone. The ultimate basis for this view is the 
belief that every proposition has a single subject and a single 
predicate, which leads us to the conclusion that relations and 
plurality must be illusory. Spinoza thought that the nature of the 
world and of human life could be logically deduced from self- 
evident axioms; we ought to be as resigned to events as to the fact 
that 2 and 2 are 4, since they are equally the outcome of logical 
necessity. The whole of this metaphysic is impossible to accept; 
it is incompatible with modern logic and with scientific method. 
Facts have to be discovered by observation, not by reasoning; 
when we successfully infer the future, we do so by means of 
principles which are not logically necessary, but are suggested by 
empirical data. And the concept of substance, upon which Spinoza 
relies, is one which neither science nor philosophy can nowadays 
accept. 

But when we come to Spinoza's ethics, we feel or at least 1 
feel that something, though not everything, can be accepted 
even when the metaphysical foundation has been rejected. Broadly 
speaking, Spinoza is concerned to show how it is possible to live 
nobly even when we recognize the limits of human power. He 
himself, by his doctrine of necessity, makes these limits narrower 
than they are; but when they indubitably exist, Spinoza's maxims 
are probably the best possible. Take, for instance, death: 
nothing that a man can do will make him immortal, and it is 
therefore futile to spend time in fears and lamentations over the 
fact that we must die. To be obsessed by the fear of death is a 
kind of slavery; Spinoza is right in saying that "the free man 
thinks of nothing less than of death." But even in this case, it is 
only death in general that should be so treated; death of any 
particular disease should, if possible, be averted by submitting to 
medical care. What should, even in this case, be avoided, is a 
certain kind of anxiety or terror; the necessary measures should be 
taken calmly, and our thoughts should, as far as possible, be then 
directed to other matters. The same considerations apply to all 
other purely personal misfortunes. 

But how about misfortunes to people whom you love? Let us 
think of some of the things that are lik'ely to happen in our time 
to inhabitants of Europe or China. Suppose you are a Jew, and 
your family has been massacred. Suppose you are an underground 
worker against the Nazis, and your wife has been shot because 

601 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

you could not be caught. Suppose your husband, for some purely 
imaginary crime, has been sent to forced labour in the Arctic, 
and has died of cruelty and starvation. Suppose your daughter 
has been raped and then killed by enemy soldiers. Ought you, 
in these circumstances, to preserve a philosophic calm ? 

If you follow Christ's teaching, you will say "Father, forgive 
them, for they know not what they do." I have known Quakers 
who could have said this sincerely and profoundly, and whom I 
admired because they could. But before giving admiration one 
must be very sure that the misfortune is felt as deeply as it should 
be. One cannot accept the attitude of some among the Stoics, 
who said, "What does it matter to me if my family suffer? I can 
still be virtuous." The Christian principle, "Love your enemies," 
is good, but the Stoic principle, "Be indifferent to your friends," is 
bad. And the Christian principle does not inculcate calm, but an 
ardent love even towards the worst of men. There is nothing to be 
said against it except that it is too difficult for most of us to practise 
sincerely. 

The primitive reaction to such disasters is revenge. When 
Macduff learns that his wife and children have been killed by 
Macbeth, he resolves to kill the tyrant himself. This reaction is 
still admired by most people, when the injury is great, and such as 
to arouse moral horror in disinterested people. Nor can it be 
wholly condemned, for it is one of the forces generating punish- 
ment, and punishment is sometimes necessary. Moreover, from 
the point of view of mental health, the impulse to revenge is likely 
to be so strong that, if it is allowed no outlet, a man's whole 
outlook on life may become distorted and more or less insane. 
This is not true universally, but it is true in a large percentage of 
cases. But on the other side it must be said that revenge is a very 
dangerous motive. In so far as society admits it, it allows a man 
to be the judge in his own case, which is exactly what the law tries 
to prevent. Moreover it is usually an excessive motive; it seeks to 
inflict more punishment than is desirable. Torture, for example, 
should not be punished by torture, but the man maddened by 
lust for vengeance will think a painless death too good for the 
object of his hate. Moreover and it is here that Spinoza is in the 
right a life dominated by a single passion is a narrow life, in- 
compatible with every kind of wisdom. Revenge as such is there- 
fore not the best reaction to injury. 

602 



SPINO2A 

Spinoza would say what the Christian says, and also* something 
more. For him, all sin is due to ignorance; he would "forgive 
them, for they know not what they do." But he would have you 
avoid the limited purview from which, in his opinion, sin springs, 
and would urge you, even under the greatest misfortunes, to 
avoid being shut up in the world of your sorrow; he would have 
you understand it by seeing it in relation to its causes and as a 
part of the whole order of nature. As we saw, he believes that 
hatred can be overcome by love: "Hatred is increased by being 
reciprocated, and can on the other hand be destroyed by love. 
Hatred which is completely vanquished by love, passes into love; 
and love is thereupon greater, than if hatred had not preceded it." 
I wish I could believe this, but I cannot, except in exceptional 
cases where the person hating is completely in the power of the 
person who refuses to hate in return. In such cases, surprise at 
being not punished may have a reforming effect. But so long as the 
wicked have power, it is not much use assuring them that you do 
not hate them, since they will attribute your words to the wrong 
motive. And you cannot deprive them of power by non-resistance. 

The problem for Spinoza is easier than it is for one who has 
no belief in the ultimate goodness of the universe. Spinoza thinks 
that, if you see your misfortunes as they are in reality, as part of 
the concatenation of causes stretching from the beginning of 
time to the end, you will see that they are only misfortunes to 
you, not to the universe, to which they are merely passing dis- 
cords heightening an ultimate harmony. I cannot accept this; 
I think that particular events are what they are, and do not become 
different by absorption into a whole. Each act of cruelty is eternally 
a part of the universe; nothing that happens later can make that 
act good rather than bad, or can confer perfection on the whole 
of which it is a part. 

Nevertheless, when it is your lot to have to endure something 
that is (or seems to you) worse than the ordinary lot of mankind, 
Spinoza's principle of thinking about the whole, or at any rate 
about larger matters than your own grief, is a useful one. There 
are even times when it is comforting Jo reflect that human life, 
with all that it contains of evil and suffering, is an infinitesimal 
pan of the life of the universe. Such reflections may not suffice 
to constitute a religion, but in a painful world they are a help 
towards sanity and an antidote to the paralysis of utter despair. 



Chapter XI 
LEIBNIZ 

CBNIZ (1646-1716) was one of the supreme intellects of all 
time, but as a human being he was not admirable. He had, 
it is true, the virtues that one would wish to find men- 
tioned in a testimonial to a prospective employee: he was in- 
dustrious, frugal, temperate, and financially honest. But he was 
wholly destitute of those higher philosophic virtues that are so 
notable in Spinoza. His best thought was not such as would win 
him popularity, and he left his records of it unpublished in his 
desk. What he published was designed to win the approbation 
of princes and princesses. The consequence is that there are two 
systems of philosophy which may be regarded as representing 
Leibniz: one, which he proclaimed, was optimistic, orthodox, 
fantastic, and shallow; the other, which has been slowly unearthed 
from his manuscripts by fairly recent editors, was profound, 
coherent, largely Spinozistic, and amazingly logical. It was the 
popular Leibniz who invented the doctrine that this is the best 
of all possible worlds (to which F. H. Bradley added the sardonic 
comment "and everything in it is a necessary evil*'); it was this 
Leibniz whom Voltaire caricatured as Doctor Pangloss. It would 
be unhistorical to ignore this Leibniz, but the other is of far 
greater philosophical importance. 

Leibniz was born two years before the end of the Thirty Years' 
War, at Leipzig* where his father was professor of moral philo- 
sophy. At the university he studied law, and in 1666 he obtained 
a Doctor's degree at Altdorf, where he was offered a professorship, 
which he refused, saying he had "very different things in view.'* 
In 1667 he entered the service of the archbishop of Mainz, who, 
like other West German princes, was oppressed by fear of Louis 
XIV. With the approval of the archbishop, Leibniz tried to 
persuade the French king to invade Egypt rather than Germany, 
but was met with a polite reminder that since the time of St. 
Louis the holy war against the infidel had gone out of fashion. 
His project remained unknown to the public until it was dis- 
covered by Napoleon when he occupied Hanover in 1803, four 
yean after his own abortive Egyptian expedition. In 1672, in 



LEIBNIZ 

connection with this scheme, Leibniz went to Paris; where he 
spent the greater part of the next four years. His contacts in 
Paris were of great importance for his intellectual development, 
for Paris at that time led the world both in philosophy and in 
mathematics. It was there, in 1675-6, that he invented the infini- 
tesimal calculus, in ignorance of Newton's previous but unpub- 
lished work on the same subject. Leibniz's work was first published 
in 1684, Newton's in 1687. The consequent dispute as to priority 
was unfortunate, and discreditable to aU parties. 

Leibniz was somewhat mean about money. When any young 
lady at the court of Hanover married, he used to give her what 
he called a "wedding present/ 9 consisting of useful maxims, 
ending up with the advice not to give up washing now that she 
had secured a husband. History does not record whether the 
brides were grateful. 

In Germany, Leibniz had been taught a neo-scholastic Aris- 
totelian philosophy, of which he retained something throughout 
his later life. But in Paris he came to know Cartesianism and the 
materialism of Gassendi, both of which influenced him; at this 
time, he said, he abandoned the "trivial schools,'* meaning 
scholasticism. In Paris he came to know Malebranche and Arnauld 
the Jansenist. The last important influence on his philosophy was 
that of Spinoza, whom he visited in 1676. He spent a month in 
frequent discussions with him, and secured pan of the Ethics 
in manuscript. In later years he joined in decrying Spinoza, and 
minimized his contacts with him, saying he had met him once, 
and Spinoza had told some good anecdotes about politics. 

His connection with the House of Hanover, in whose service he 
remained for the rest of his life, began in 1673. From 1680 onwards 
he was their librarian at Wolfenbiittel, and was officially employed 
in writing the history of Brunswick. He had reached the year 
1009 when he died. The work was not published till 1843. Some 
of his time was spent on a project for the reunion of the Churches, 
but this proved abortive. He travelled to Italy to obtain evidence 
that the Dukes of Brunswick were connected with the Este family. 
But in spite of these services he was left behind at Hanover when 
George I became king of England, the chief reason being that his 
quarrel with Newton had made England unfriendly to him. How- 
ever, the Princess of Wales, as he told all his correspondents, sided 
with him against Newton. In spite of her favour, he died neglected. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Leibniz's popular philosophy may be found in the Monadology 
and the Principles of Nature and of Grace, one of which (it is 
uncertain which) he wrote for Prince Eugene of Savoy, Marl- 
borough's colleague. The basis of his theological optimism is 
set forth in the Theodictc, which he wrote for Queen Charlotte 
of Prussia. I shall begin with the philosophy set forth in these 
writings, and then proceed to his more solid work which he left 
unpublished. 

Like Descartes and Spinoza, Leibniz based his philosophy on the 
notion of substance, but he differed radically from them as regards 
the relation of mind and matter, and as regards the number of 
substances. Descartes allowed three substances, God and mind 
and matter; Spinoza admitted God alone. For Descartes, extension 
is the essence of matter; for Spinoza, both extension and thought 
are attributes of God. Leibniz held that extension cannot be an 
attribute of a substance. His reason was that extension involves 
plurality, and can therefore only belong to an aggregate of sub- 
stances; each single substance must be u next ended. He believed, 
consequently, in an infinite number of substances, which he 
called "monads." Each of these would have some of the properties 
of a physical point, but only when viewed abstractly ; in fact, each 
monad is a soul. This follows naturally from the rejection of 
extension as an attribute of substance; the only remaining possible 
essential attribute seemed to be thought. Thus Leibniz was led 
to deny the reality of matter, and to substitute an infinite family 
of souls. 

The doctrine that substances cannot interact, which had been 
developed by Descartes 9 followers, was retained by Leibniz, and 
led to curious consequences. No two monads, he held, can ever 
have any causal relation to each other ; when it seems as if they had, 
appearances are deceptive. Monads, as he expressed it, are 
"windowless." This led to two difficulties: one in dynamics, 
where bodies seem to affect each other, especially in impact; 
the other in relation to perception, which seems to be an effect 
of the perceived object upon the percipient. We will ignore the 
dynamical difficulty for the present, and consider only the question 
of perception. Leibniz held that every monad mirrors the universe, 
not because the universe affects it, but because God has given it 
a nature which spontaneously produces this result. There is a 
"pre-established harmony between the changes in one monad 

606 



LBIBNIZ 

and those in another, which produces the semblance of inter- 
action. This is obviously an extension of the two clocks, which 
strike at the same moment because each keeps perfect time. 
Leibniz has an infinite number of clocks, all arranged by the 
Creator to strike at the same instant, not because they affect 
each other, but because each is a perfectly accurate mechanism. 
To those who thought the pre-established harmony odd, Leibniz 
pointed out what admirable evidence it afforded of the existence 
of God. 

Monads form a hierarchy, in which some are superior to others 
in the clearness and distinctness with which they mirror the 
universe. In all there is some degree of confusion in perception, 
but the amount of confusion varies according to the dignity of 
the monad concerned. A human body is entirely composed of 
monads, each of which is a soul, and each of which is immortal, 
but there is one dominant monad which is what is called the soul 
of the man of whose body it forms pan. This monad is dominant, 
not only in the sense of having clearer perceptions than the others, 
but also in another sense. The changes in a human body (in 
ordinary circumstances) happen for the sake of the dominant 
monad: when my arm moves, the purpose served by the move- 
ment is in the dominant monad, i.e. my mind, not in the monads 
that compose my arm. This is the truth of what appears to common 
sense as the control of my will over my arm. 

Space, as it appears to the senses, and as it is assumed in physics, 
is not real, but it has a real counterpart, namely the arrangement 
of the monads in a three-dimensional order according to the 
point of view from which they mirror the world. Each monad sees 
the world in a certain perspective peculiar to itself; in this sense 
we can speak, somewhat loosely, of the monad as having a spatial 
position. 

Allowing ourselves this way of speaking, we can say that there is 
no such thing as a vacuum; every possible point of view is filled 
by one actual monad, and by only one. No two monads are 
exactly alike; this is Leibniz's principle of the "identity of tn- 
discernibles." 

In contrasting himself with Spinoza, Kcibniz made much of the 
free will allowed in his system. He had a "principle of sufficient 
reason,*' according to which nothing happens without a reason; 
but when we are concerned with free agents, the reasons for their 

607 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

actions "incline without necessitating. 91 What a human being does 
always has a motive, but the sufficient reason of his action has no 
logical necessity. So, at least, Leibniz says when he is writing 
popularly, but, as we shall see, he had another doctrine which he 
kept to himself after finding that Arnauld thought it shocking. 

God's actions have the same kind of freedom. He always acts 
for the best, but He is not under any logical compulsion to do so. 
Leibniz agrees with Thomas Aquinas that God cannot act con- 
trary to the laws of logic, but He can decree whatever is logically 
possible, and this leaves Him a great latitude of choice. 

Leibniz brought into their final form the metaphysical proofs of 
God's existence. These had a long history; they begin with Aris- 
totle, or even with Plato; they are formalized by the scholastics, 
and one of them, the ontological argument, was invented by 
St. Anselm. This argument, though rejected by St. Thomas, 
was revived by Descartes. Leibniz, whose logical skill was supreme, 
stated the arguments better than they had ever been stated before. 
That is my reason for examining them in connection with 
him. 

Before examining the arguments in detail, it is as well to realize 
that modern theologians no longer rely upon them. Medieval 
theology is derivative from the Greek intellect. The God of the 
Old Testament is a God of power, the God of the New Testament 
is also a God of love ; but the God of the theologians, from Aristotle 
to Calvin, is one whose appeal is intellectual : His existence solves 
certain puzzles which otherwise would create argumentative diffi- 
culties in the understanding of the universe. This Deity who appears 
at the end of a piece of reasoning, like the proof of a proposition 
in geometry, did not satisfy Rousseau, who reverted to a conception 
of God more akin to that of the Gospels. In the main, modem 
theologians, especially such as are Protestant, have followed 
Rousseau in this respect. The philosophers have been more 
conservative; in Hegel, Lotze, and Bradley arguments of the 
metaphysical sort persist, in spite of the fact that Kant professed 
to have demolished such arguments once for all. 

Leibniz's arguments for the existence of God are four in 
number; they are (i) the ontological argument, (2) the cosmo- 
iogical argument, (3) the argument from eternal truths, (4) the 
argument from the pre-established harmony, which may be 
generalized into the argument from design, or the physico- 

608 



LEIBNIZ 

theological argument, as Kant calls it. We will consider these 
arguments successively. 

The ontological argument depends upon the distinction between 
existence and essence. Any ordinary person or thing, it is held, on 
the one hand exists, and on the other hand has certain qualities, 
which make up his or its "essence." Hamlet, though he does not 
exist, has a certain essence; he is melancholy, undecided, witty, 
etc. When we describe a person, the question whether he is real 
or imaginary remains open, however minute our description may 
be. This is expressed in scholastic language by saying that, in 
the case of any finite substance, its essence does not imply its 
existence. But in the case of God, defined as the most perfect 
Being, St. Anselm, followed by Descartes, maintains that essence 
does imply existence, on the ground that a Being who possesses 
all other perfections is better if He exists than if He does not, 
from which it follows that if He does not He is not the best 
possible Being. 

Leibni2 neither wholly accepts nor wholly rejects this argument ; 
it needs to be supplemented, so he says, by a proof that God, so 
defined, is possible. He wrote out a proof that die idea of God is 
possible, which he showed to Spinoza when he saw him at the 
Hague. This proof defines God as the most perfect Being, i.e. 
as the subject of all perfections, and a perfection is defined as a 
"simple quality which is positive and absolute, and expresses 
without any limits whatever it does express." Leibniz easily 
proves that no two perfections, as above defined, can be incom- 
patible. He concludes: "There is, therefore, or there can be 
conceived, a subject of all perfections, or most perfect Being. 
Whence it follows also that He exists, for existence is among the 
number of the perfections.*' 

Kant countered this argument by maintaining that "existence" 
is not a predicate. Another kind of refutation results from my 
theory of descriptions. The argument does not, to a modern mind, 
seem very convincing, but it is easier to feel convinced that it 
must be fallacious than it is to find out precisely where the fallacy 
lies. 

The cosmological argument is morl plausible than the onto- 
logical argument. It is a form of the First-Cause argument, which 
is itself derived from Aristotle's argument of the unmoved mover. 
The First-Cause argument is simple. It points out that everything 

If fetor? / Wat** /*AtfuMp*y 609 U 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

finite has a cause, which in turn had a cause, and so on. This 
series of previous causes cannot, it is maintained, be infinite, and 
the first term in the series must itself be uncaused, since otherwise 
it would not be the first term. There is therefore an uncaused 
cause of everything, and this is obviously God. 

In Leibniz the argument takes a somewhat different form. He 
argues that every particular thing in the world is "contingent," 
that is to say, it would be logically possible for it not to exist; 
and this is true, not only of each particular thing, but of the whole 
universe. Even if we suppose the universe to have always existed, 
there is nothing within the universe to show why it exists. But 
everything has to have a sufficient reason, according to Leibniz's 
philosophy; therefore the universe as a whole must have a suffi- 
cient reason, which must be outside the universe. This sufficient 
reason is God. 

This argument is better than the straightforward First-Cause 
argument, and cannot be so easily refuted. The First-Cause 
argument rests on the assumption that every series must have a 
first term, which is false ; for example, the series of proper fractions 
has no first term. But Leibniz's argument does not depend upon 
the view that the universe must have had a beginning in time. 
The argument is valid so long as we grant Leibniz's principle of 
sufficient reason, but if this principle is denied it collapses. What 
exactly Leibniz meant by the principle of sufficient reason is a 
controversial question. Couturat maintains that it means that 
every true proposition is "analytic/ 1 i.e. such that its contra- 
dictory is self-contradictory. But this interpretation (which has 
support in writings that Leibniz did not publish) belongs, if true, 
to the esoteric doctrine. In his published works he maintains that 
there is a difference between necessary and contingent propositions, 
that only the former follow from the laws of logic, and that all 
propositions asserting existence are contingent, with the sole 
exception of the existence of God. Though God exists necessarily, 
He was not compelled by logic to create the world ; on the contrary, 
this was a free choice, motivated, but not necessitated, by His 
goodness. 

It is dear that Kant is ri|ht in saying that this argument depends 
upon the ontological argument. If the existence of the world can 
only be accounted for by the existence of a necessary Being, then 
there must be a Being whose essence involves existence, for 

610 



LEIBNIZ 

that is what is meant by a necessary Being. But if it is possible 
that there should be a Being whose essence involves existence 
then reason alone, without experience, can define such a Being 
whose existence will follow from the ontological argument; for 
everything that has to do only with essence can be known inde- 
pendently of experience such at least is Leibniz's view. The 
apparent greater plausibility of the cosmological as opposed to the 
ontological argument is therefore deceptive. 

The argument from the eternal truths is a little difficult to state 
precisely. Roughly, the argument is this: Such a statement as 
"it is raining" is sometimes true and sometimes false, but "two 
and two are four' 9 is always true. AH statements that have only to 
do with essence, not with existence, are either always true or 
never true. Those that are always true are called "eternal truths." 
The gist of the argument is that truths are pan of the contents of 
minds, and that an eternal truth must be part of the content of an 
eternal mind. There is already an argument not unlike this in 
Plato, where he deduces immortality from the eternity of the ideas. 
But in Leibniz the argument is more developed. He holds that the 
ultimate reason for contingent truths must be found in necessary 
truths. The argument here is as in the cosmological argument: 
there must be a reason for the whole contingent world, and this 
reason cannot itself be contingent, but must be sought among 
eternal truths. But a reason for what exists must itself exist; 
therefore eternal truths must, in some sense, exist, and they can 
only exist as thoughts in the mind of God. This argument is 
really only another form of the cosmological argument. It is, 
however, open to the further objection that a truth can hardly be 
said to "exist" in a mind which apprehends it. 

The argument from the pre-established harmony, as Leibniz 
states it, is only valid for those who accept his windowless monads 
which all mirror the universe. The argument is that, since all the 
clocks keep time with each other without any causal interaction, 
there must have been a single outside Cause that regulated all 
of them. The difficulty, of course, is the one that besets the whole 
monadology: if the monads never interact, how does any one of 
them know that there are any others? What seems like mirroring 
the universe may be merely a dream. In fact, if Leibniz is right, 
it ii merely a dream, but he has ascertained somehow that all the 
monads have similar dreams at the same time. This, of course, 

6it 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

is fantastic, and would ntver have seemed credible but for the 
previous history of Cartesianism. 

Leibniz's argument, however, can be freed from dependence on 
his peculiar metaphysic, and transformed into what is called the 
argument from design. This argument contends that, on a survey 
of the known world, we find things which cannot plausibly be 
explained as the product of blind natural forces, but are much 
more reasonably to be regarded as evidences of a beneficent 
purpose. 

This argument has no formal logical defect; its premisses are 
empirical, and its conclusion professes to be reached in accordance 
with the usual canons of empirical inference. The question whether 
it is to be accepted or not turns, therefore, not on general meta- 
physical questions, but on comparatively detailed considerations. 
There is one important difference between this argument and the 
others, namely, that the God whom (if valid) it demonstrates 
need not have all the usual metaphysical attributes. He need not 
be omnipotent or omniscient; He may be only vastly wiser and 
more powerful than we are. The evils in the world may be due to 
His limited power. Some modern theologians have made use of 
these possibilities in forming their conception of God. But such 
speculations are remote from the philosophy of Leibniz, to which 
we must now return. 

One of the most characteristic features of that philosophy is the 
doctrine of many possible worlds. A world is "possible" if it does 
not contradict the laws of logic. There are an infinite number of 
possible worlds, all of which God contemplated before creating 
the actual world. Being good, God decided to create the best of 
the possible worlds, and He considered that one to be the best 
which had the greatest excess of good over evil He could have 
created a world containing no evil, but it would not have been so 
good as the actual world. That is because some great goods are 
logically bound up with certain evils. To take a trivial illustration, 
a drink of cold water when you are very thirsty on a hot day may 
give you such great pleasure that you think the previous thirst, 
though painful, was worth enduring, because without it the 
subsequent enjoyment could not have been so great. For theology, 
it is not such illustrations that are important, but the connection 
of sin with free will. Free will is a great good, but it was logically 
imoosftible for God to bestow free will and at the same time 



LEIBNIZ 

decree that there should be no sin. God therefore decided to make 
man free, although he foresaw that Adam would eat the apple, 
and although sin inevitably brought punishment. The world 
that resulted, although it contains evil, has a greater surplus of 
good over evil than any other possible world; it is therefore the 
best of all possible worlds, and the evil that it contains affords no 
argument against the goodness of God. 

This argument apparently satisfied the Queen of Prussia. Her 
serfs continued to suffer the evil, while she continued to enjoy the 
good, and it was comforting to be assured by a great philosopher 
that this was just and right. 

Leibniz's solution of the problem of evil, like most of his other 
popular doctrines, is logically possible, but not very convincing. A 
Manicharan might retort that this is the worst of all possible worlds, 
in which the good things that exist serve only to heighten the evils. 
The world, he might say, was created by a wicked demiurge, who 
allowed free will, which is good, in order to make sure of sin, which 
is bad, and of which the evil outweighs the good of free will. The 
demiurge, he might continue, created some virtuous men, in order 
that they might be punished by the wicked ; for the punishment of 
the virtuous is so great an evil that it makes the world worse than if 
no good men existed. I am not advocating this opinion, which I 
consider fantastic; I am only saying that it is no more fantastic 
than Leibniz's theory. People wish to think the universe good, 
and will be lenient to bad arguments proving that it is so, while 
bad arguments proving that it is bad are closely scanned. In fact, 
of course, the world is partly good and partly bad, and no "prob- 
lem of evil" arises unless this obvious fact is denied. 

I come now to Leibniz's esoteric philosophy, in which we find 
reasons for much that seems arbitrary or fantastic in his popular 
expositions, as well as an interpretation of his doctrines which, if 
it had become generally known, would have made them much less 
acceptable. It is a remarkable fact that he so imposed upon sub- 
sequent students of philosophy that most of the editors who 
published selections from the immense mass of his manuscripts 
preferred what supported the received interpretation of his 
system, and rejected as unimportant Asays which prove him to 
have been a far more profound thinker than he wished to be 
thought. Most of the texts upon which we must rely for an 
understanding of his esoteric doctrine were first published in 

613 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

1901 or 1903, in two works by Louis Couturat. One of these was 
even headed by Leibniz with the remark: "Here I have made 
enormous progress." But in spite of this, no editor thought it 
worth printing until Leibniz had been dead for nearly two cen- 
turies. It is true that his letters to Arnauld, which contain a part 
of his more profound philosophy, were published in the nineteenth 
century; but I was the first to notice their importance. Amauld's 
reception of these letters was discouraging. He writes: "I find 
in these thoughts so many things which alarm me, and which 
almost aU men, if I am not mistaken, will find so shocking, that 
I do not see of what use a writing can be, which apparently 
all the world will reject." This hostile opinion no doubt led Leib- 
niz, thenceforth, to adopt a policy of secrecy as to his real thoughts 
on philosophical subjects. 

The conception of substance, which is fundamental in the 
philosophies of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, is derived from 
the logical category of subject and predicate. Some words can be 
either subjects or predicates; e.g., I can say "the sky is blue'* 
and "blue is a colour." Other words of which proper names are 
the most obvious instances can never occur as predicates, but 
only as subjects, or as one of the terms of a relation. Such words 
are held to designate substances. Substances, in addition to this 
logical characteristic, persist through time, unless destroyed by 
God's omnipotence (which, one gathers, never happens). Every 
true proposition is either general, like "all men are mortal,'* 
in which case it states that one predicate implies another, or 
particular, like "Socrates is mortal/' in which case the predicate 
is contained in the subject, and the quality denoted by the predi- 
cate is part of the notion of the substance denoted by the subject. 
Whatever happens to Socrates can be asserted in a sentence in 
which "Socrates" is the subject and the words describing the 
happening in question are the predicate. All these predicates put 
together make up the "notion" of Socrates. All belong to 
him necessarily, in this sense, that a substance of which they 
could not be truly asserted would not be Socrates, but some 
one else. 

Leibniz was a firm believer n the importance of logic, not only 
in its own sphere, but as the basts of metaphysics. He did work on 
mathematical logic which would have been enormously important 
if he had published it; he would, in that case, have been the 

614 



LEIBNIZ 

founder of mathematical logic, which would have become known 
a century and a half sooner than it did in fact. He abstained from 
publishing, because he kept on finding evidence that Aristotle's 
doctrine of the syllogism was wrong on some points; respect for 
Aristotle made it impossible for him to believe this, so he mis- 
takenly supposed that the errors must be his own. Nevertheless 
he cherished throughout his life the hope of discovering a kind of 
generalized mathematics, which he called Characteristica Uni- 
ver satis, by means of which thinking could be replaced by calcu- 
lation. "If we had it," he says, "we should be able to reason in 
metaphysics and morals in much the same way as in geometry 
and analysis." "If controversies were to arise, there would be no 
more need of disputation between two philosophers than between 
two accountants. For it would suffice to take their pencils in their 
hands, to sit down to their slates, and to say to each other (with 
a friend as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate." 

Leibniz based his philosophy upon two logical premisses, the 
law of contradiction and the law of sufficient reason. Both depend 
upon the notion of an "analytic" proposition, which is one in 
which the predicate is contained in the subject for instance, "all 
white men are men." The law of contradiction states that all 
analytic propositions are true. The law of sufficient reason (in the 
esoteric system only) states that all true propositions are analytic. 
This applies even to what we should regard as empirical state- 
ments about matters of fact. If I make a journey, the notion of 
me must from all eternity have included the notion of this journey, 
which is a predicate of me. "We may say that the nature of an 
individual substance, or complete being, is to have a notion so 
completed that it suffices to comprehend, and to render deducible 
from it, all the predicates of the subject to which this notion is 
attributed. Thus the quality of king, which belongs to Alexander 
the Great, abstracting from the subject, is not sufficiently deter- 
mined for an individual, and does not involve other qualities of 
the same subject, nor all that the notion of this prince contains, 
whereas God, seeing the individual notion or hecceityof Alexander, 
sees in it at the same time the foundation and the reason of all the 
predicates which can be truly attributed to him, as e:g. whether 
he would conquer Darius and Poms, even to knowing a priori 
(and not by experience) whether he died a natural death or by 
poison, which we can only know by history." 

615 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

One of the most definite statements of the basis of his meta- 
physic occurs in a letter to Arnauld: 

"In consulting the notion which I have of every true proposition, 
I find that every predicate, necessary or contingent, past, present, 
or future, is comprised in the notion of the subject, and I ask 
no more. . . . The proposition in question is of great importance, 
and deserves to be well established, for it follows that every soul 
is as a world apart, independent of everything else except 
God; that it is not only immortal and so to speak impassible, 
but that it keeps in its substance traces of all that happens 
to it." 

He goes on to explain that substances do not act on each other, 
but agree through all mirroring the universe, each from its own 
point of view. There can be no interaction, because all that happens 
to each subject is part of its own notion, and eternally determined 
if that substance exists. 

This system is evidently just as deterministic as that of Spinoza. 
Arnauld expresses his horror of the statement (which Leibniz had 
made): "That the individual notion of each person involves once 
for all everything that will ever happen to him." Such a view is 
evidently incompatible with the Christian doctrine of sin and 
free will. Finding it ill received by Arnauld, Leibniz carefully 
refrained from making it public. 

For human beings, it is true, there is a difference between 
truths known by logic and truths known by experience. This 
difference arises in two ways. In the first place, although every- 
thing that happens to Adam follows from his notion, if he exists, 
we can only ascertain his existence by experience. In the second 
place, the notion of any individual substance is infinitely complex, 
and the analysis required to deduce his predicates is only possible 
for God. These differences, however, are only due to our ignorance 
and intellectual limitation; for God, they do not exist. God 
apprehends the notion of Adam in all its infinite complexity, 
and can therefore see all true propositions about Adam as analytic. 
God can also ascertain a priori whether Adam exists. For God 
knows His own goodness, from which it follows that He will 
create the best possible world ; and He also knows whether or not 
Adam forms part of this world. There is therefore no real escape 
from determinism through our ignorance. 

There is, however, a further point, which is very curious. At 

616 



LEIBNIZ 

most times, Leibniz repnesents the Creation as a free act of God, 
requiring the exercise of His will. According to this doctrine, the 
determination of what actually exists is not effected by observation, 
but must proceed by way of God's goodness. Apart from God's 
goodness, which leads Him to create the best possible world, 
there is no a priori reason why one thing should exist rather than 
another. 

But sometimes, in papers not shown to any human being, 
there is a quite different theory as to why some things exist and 
others, equally possible, do not. According to this view, everything 
that does not exist struggles to exist, but not all possibles can 
exist, because they are not all "compossible." It may be possible 
that A should exist, and also possible that B should exist, but not 
possible that both A and B should exist; in that case, A and B 
are not "compossible/' Two or more things are only "compossible" 
when it is possible for all of them to exist. Leibniz seems to have 
imagined a sort of war in the Limbo inhabited by essences all 
trying to exist ; in this war, groups of compossibles combine, and 
the largest group of compossibles wins, like the largest pressure 
group in a political contest. Leibniz even uses this conception as 
a way of defining existence. He says: "The existent may be defined 
as that which is compatible with more things than is anything 
incompatible with itself." That is to say, if A is incompatible 
with B, while A is compatible with C and D and , but B is only 
compatible with F and G, then A, but not B, exists by definition. 
"The existent," he says, "is the being which is compatible with 
the most things." 

In this account, there is no mention of God, and apparently no 
act of creation. Nor is there need of anything but pure logic for 
determining what exists. The question whether A and B are 
compossible is, for Leibniz, a logical question, namely: Does the 
existence of both A and B involve a contradiction ? It follows that, 
in theory, logic can decide the question what group of compossibles 
is the largest, and this group consequently will exist. 

Perhaps, however, Leibniz did not really mean that the above 
was a definition of existence. If it was jnerely a criterion, it can 
be reconciled with his popular views by means of what he calls 
"metaphysical perfection. " Metaphysical perfection, as he uses 
the term, seems to mean quantity of existence. It is, he says, 
"nothing but the magnitude of positive reality strictly understood." 

617 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

He always argues that God created as much as possible; this is 
one of his reasons for rejecting a vacuum. There is a general 
belief (which I have never understood) that it is better to exist 
than' not to exist; on this ground children are exhorted to be 
grateful to their parents. Leibniz evidently held this view, and 
thought it part of God's goodness to create as full a universe as 
possible. It would follow that the actual world would consist of 
the largest group of compossibles. It would still be true that logic 
alone, given a sufficiently able logician, could decide whether a 
given possible substance would exist or not. 

Leibniz, in his private thinking, is the best example of a philo- 
sopher who uses logic as a key to metaphysics. This type of philo- 
sophy begins with Parmenides, and is carried further in Plato's 
use of the theory of ideas toprove various extra-logical propositions. 
Spinoza belongs to the same type, and so does Hegel. But none 
of these is so clear-cut as Leibniz in drawing inferences from 
syntax to the real world. This kind of argumentation has fallen 
into disrepute owing to the growth of empiricism. Whether any 
valid inferences are possible from language to non-linguistic facts 
is a question as to which I do not care to dogmatize; but certainly 
the inferences found in Leibniz and other a priori philosophers 
are not valid, since all are due to a defective logic. The subject- 
predicate logic, which all such philosophers in the past assumed, 
either ignores relations altogether, or produces fallacious argu- 
ments to prove that relations are unreal. Leibniz is guilty of a 
special inconsistency in combining the subject-predicate logic 
with pluralism, for the proposition "there are many monads" is 
not of the subject-predicate form. To be consistent, a philosopher 
who believes all propositions to be of this form should be a 
monist, like Spinoza. Leibniz rejected monism largely owing to 
his interest in dynamics, and to his argument that extension 
involves repetition, and therefore cannot be an attribute of a 
single substance. 

Leibniz is a dull writer, and his effect on German philosophy 
was to make it pedantic and arid. His disciple Wolf, who dominated 
the German universities iintil the publication of Kant's Critique 
of Pure Reason, left out whatever was most interesting in Leibniz, 
and produced a dry professorial way of thinking. Outside Ger- 
many, Leibniz's philosophy had little influence; his contemporary, 
Locke, governed British philosophy, while in France Descartes 

618 



LEIBNIZ 

continued to reign until he was overthrown by Voltaire, who 
made English empiricism fashionable. 

Nevertheless, Leibniz remains a great man, and his greatness 
is more apparent now than it was at any earlier time. Apart from 
his eminence as a mathematician and as the inventor of the 
infinitesimal calculus, he was a pioneer in mathematical logic, of 
which he perceived the importance when no one else did so. And 
his philosophical hypotheses, though fantastic, are very clear, 
and capable of precise expression. Even his monads can still be 
useful as suggesting possible ways of viewing perception, though 
they cannot be regarded as windowless. What I, for my part, 
think best in his theory of monads is his two kinds of space, one 
subjective, in the perceptions of each monad, and one objective, 
consisting of the assemblage of points of view of the various 
monads. This, I believe, is still useful in relating perception to 
physics. 



619 



Chapter XII 
PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM 

E IHE rise of liberalism, in politics and philosophy, provides 
I material for the study of a very general and very important 

JL question, namely: What has been the influence of political 
and social circumstances upon the thoughts of eminent and ori- 
ginal thinkers, and, conversely, what has been the influence of 
these men upon subsequent political and social develop- 
ments? 

Two opposite errors, both common, are to be guarded against. 
On the one hand, men who are more familiar with books than with 
affairs are apt to over-estimate the influence of philosophers. When 
they see some political party proclaiming itself inspired by So- 
and-So's teaching,they think its actions are attributable to So-and- 
So, whereas, not infrequently, the philosopher is only acclaimed 
because he recommends what the party would have done in any 
case. Writers of books, until recently, almost all exaggerated the 
effects of their predecessors in the same trade. But conversely, a 
new error has arisen by reaction against the old one, and this new 
error consists in regarding theorists as almost passive products of 
their circumstances, and as having hardly any influence at all 
upon the course of events. Ideas, according to this view, are the 
froth on the surface of deep currents, which are determined by 
material and technical causes: social changes are no more caused 
by thought than the flow of a river is caused by the bubbles that 
reveal its direction to an onlooker. For my part, I believe that the 
truth lies between these two extremes. Between ideas and practical 
life, as everywhere else, there is reciprocal interaction; to ask 
which is cause and which effect is as futile as the problem of the 
hen and the egg. I shall not waste time upon a discussion of this 
question in the abstract, but shall consider historically one im- 
portant case of the general question, namely the development of 
liberalism and its off-shoots from the end of the seventeenth 
century to the present day! 

Early liberalism was a product of England and Holland, and 
had certain well-marked characteristics. It stood for religious 
toleration; it was Protestant, but of a latitudinarian rather than 

620 



PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM 

of a fanatical kind; it regarded the wars of religion as silly. It 
valued commerce and industry, and favoured the rising middle 
class rather than the monarchy and the aristocracy ; it had immense 
respect for the rights of property, especially when accumulated 
by the labours of the individual possessor. The hereditary prin- 
ciple, though not rejected, was restricted in scope more than it 
had previously been ; in particular, the divine right of kings was 
rejected in favour of the view that every community has a right, 
at any rate initially, to choose its own form of government. 
Implicitly, the tendency of early liberalism was towards demo- 
cracy tempered by the rights of property. There was a belief 
not at first wholly explicit that all men are born equal, and that 
their subsequent inequality is a product of circumstances. This 
led to a great emphasis upon the importance of education a? 
opposed to congenital characteristics. There was a certain bias 
against government, because governments almost everywhere 
were in the hands of kings or aristocracies, who seldom either 
understood or respected the needs of merchants, but this bias 
was held in check by the hope that the necessary understanding 
and respect would be won before long. 

Early liberalism was optimistic, energetic, and philosophic, 
because it represented growing forces which appeared likely to 
become victorious without great difficulty, and to bring by their 
victory great benefits to mankind. It was opposed to everything 
medieval, both in philosophy and in politics, because medieval 
theories had been used to sanction the powers of Church and king, 
to justify persecution, and to obstruct the rise of science; but it 
was opposed equally to the then modern fanaticisms of Calvinists 
and Anabaptists. It wanted an end to political and theological 
strife, in order to liberate energies for the exciting enterprises of 
commerce and science, such as the East India Company and the 
Bank of England, the theory of gravitation and the discovery of 
the circulation of the blood. Throughout the Western world 
bigotry was giving place to enlightenment, the fear of Spanish 
power was ending, all classes were increasing in prosperity, and 
the highest hopes appeared to be warranted by the most sober 
judgment. For a hundred years, nothing occurred to dim these 
hopes; then, at last, they themselves generated the French Revo- 
lution, which led directly to Napoleon and thence to the Holy 
A liance. After these events, liberalism had to acquire its second 

6ai 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

wind before the renewed optimism oi the nineteenth century 
became possible. 

Before embarking upon any detail, it will be well to consider 
the general pattern of the liberal movements from the seventeenth 
to the nineteenth century. This pattern is at first simple, but 
grows gradually more and more complex. The distinctive character 
of the whole movement is, in a certain wide sense, individualism; 
but this is a vague term until further defined. The philosophers 
of Greece, down to and including Aristotle, were not individualists 
in the sense in which I wish to use the term. They thought of a 
man as essentially a member of a community; Plato's Republic, 
for example, is concerned to define the good community, not the 
good individual. With the loss of political liberty from the time 
of Alexander onwards, individualism developed, and was repre- 
sented by the Cynics and Stoics. According to the Stoic philo- 
sophy, a man could live a good life in no matter what social cir- 
cumstances. This was also the view of Christianity, especially 
before it acquired control of the State. But in the Middle Ages, 
while mystics kept alive the original individualistic trends in 
Christian ethics, the outlook of most men, including the majority 
of philosophers, was dominated by a firm synthesis of dogma, 
law, and custom, which caused men's theoretical beliefs and 
practical morality to be controlled by a social institution, namely 
the Catholic Church: what was true and what was good was to 
be ascertained, not by solitary thought, but by the collective 
wisdom of Councils. 

The first important breach in this system was made by Pro- 
testantism, which asserted that General Councils may err. To 
determine the truth thus became no longer a social but an indi- 
vidual enterprise. Since different individuals reached different 
conclusions, the result was strife, and theological decisions were 
sought, no longer in assemblies of bishops, but on the battle-field. 
Since neither party was able to extirpate the other, it became 
evident, in the end, that a method must be found of reconciling 
intellectual and ethical individualism with ordered social life. 
This was one of the main problems which early liberalism 
attempted to solve, v 

Meanwhile individualism had penetrated into philosophy. 
Descartes 9 fundamental certainty, "I think, therefore I am," made 
the basis of knowledge different for each person, since for each 

622 



PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM 

the starting-point was his own existence, not that of other indi- 
viduals or of the community. His emphasis upon the reliability 
of clear and distinct ideas tended in the same direction, since it is 
by introspection that we think we discover whether our ideas are 
clear and distinct. Most philosophy since Descartes has had this 
intellectually individualistic aspect in a greater or less degree. 

There are, however, various forms of this general position, 
which have, in practice, very different consequences. The outlook 
of the typical scientific discoverer has perhaps the smallest dose 
of individualism. When he arrives at a new theory, he does so 
solely because it seems right to him; he does not bow to authority, 
for, if he did, he would continue to accept the theories of his 
predecessors. At the same time, his appeal is to generally received 
canons of truth, and he hopes to persuade other men, not by his 
authority, but by arguments which are convincing to them as 
individuals. In science, any clash between the individual and 
society is in essence transitory, since men of science, broadly 
speaking, all accept the same intellectual standards, and therefore 
debate and investigation usually produce agreement in the end. 
This, however, is a modern development; in the time of Galileo, 
the authority of Aristotle and the Church was still considered at 
least as cogent as the evidence of the senses. This shows how the 
element of individualism in scientific method, though not pro- 
minent, is nevertheless essential. 

Early liberalism was individualistic in intellectual matters, and 
also in economics, but was not emotionally or ethically self- 
assertive. This form of liberalism dominated the English eighteenth 
century, the founders of the American Constitution, and the 
French encyclopaedists. During the French Revolution, it was 
represented by the more moderate parties, including the Girondins, 
but with their extermination it disappeared for a generation from 
French politics. In England, after the Napoleonic wars, it again 
became influential with the rise of the Benthamites and the 
Manchester School. Its greatest success has been in America, 
where, unhampered by feudalism and a State Church, it has 
been dominant from 1776 to the present day, or at any rate to 1933. 

A new movement, which has gradually developed into the anti- 
thesis of liberalism, begins with Rousseau, and acquires strength 
from the romantic movement and the principle of nationality. 
In this movement, individualism is extended from the intellectual 

623 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sphere to that of the passions, and the anarchic aspects of indivi- 
dualism are made explicit. The cult of the hero, as developed by 
Carlyle and Nietzsche, is typical of this philosophy. Various 
elements were combined in it. There was dislike of early indus- 
trialism, hatred of the ugliness that it produced, and revulsion 
against its cruelties. There was a nostalgia for the Middle Ages, 
which were idealized owing to hatred of the modern world. 
There was an attempt to combine championship of the fading 
privileges of Church and aristocracy with defence of wage-earners 
against the tyranny of manufacturers. There was vehement 
assertion of the right of rebellion in the name of nationalism, and 
of the splendour of war in defence of "liberty." Byron was the 
poet of this movement; Fichte, Carlyle, and Nietzsche were its 
philosophers. 

But since we cannot all have the career of heroic leaders, and 
cannot all make our individual will prevail, this philosophy, like 
all other forms of anarchism, inevitably leads, when adopted, to 
the despotic government of the most successful "hero." And when 
his tyranny is established, be will suppress in others the self- 
assertive ethic by which he has risen to power. This whole theory 
of life, therefore, is self-refuting, in the sense that its adoption 
in practice leads to the realization of something utterly different: 
a dictatorial State in which the individual is severely repressed. 

There is yet another philosophy which, in the main, is an off- 
shoot of liberalism, namely that of Marx. I shall consider him at a 
later stage, but for the moment he is merely to be borne in mind. 

The first comprehensive statement of the liberal philosophy is 
to be found in Locke, the most influential though by no means 
the most profound of modern philosophers. In England, his views 
were so completely in harmony with those of most intelligent 
men that it is difficult to trace their influence except in theoretical 
philosophy; in France, on the other hand, where they led to an 
opposition to the existing regime in practice and to the prevailing 
Canesianism in theory, they clearly had a considerable effect in 
shaping the course of events. This is an example of a general 
principle: a philosophy developed in a politically and economically 
advanced country, which* is, in its birthplace, little more than a 
clarification and systematization of prevalent opinion, may 
become elsewhere a source of revolutionary ardour, and ultimately 
of actual revolution. It is mainly through theorists that the 

624 



PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM 

maxims regulating the policy of advanced countries become 
known to less advanced countries. In the advanced countries, 
practice inspires theory; in the others, theory inspires practice. 
This difference is one of the reasons why transplanted ideas are 
seldom so successful as they were in their native soil. 

Before considering the philosophy of Locke, let us review some 
of the circumstances in seventeenth-century England that were 
influential in forming his opinions. 

The conflict between King and Parliament in the Civil War 
gave Englishmen, once for all, a love of compromise and modera- 
tion, and a fear of pushing any theory to its logical conclusion, 
which has dominated them down to the present time. The prin- 
ciples for which the Long Parliament contended had, at first, the 
support of a large majority. They wished to abolish the king's 
right to grant trade monopolies, and to make him acknowledge 
the exclusive right of Parliament to impose taxes. They desired 
liberty within the Church of England for opinions and practices 
which were persecuted by Archbishop Laud. They held that 
Parliament should meet at stated intervals, and should not be 
convoked only on rare occasions when the king found its colla- 
boration indispensable. They objected to arbitrary arrest and to 
the subservience of the judges to the royal wishes. But many, 
while prepared to agitate for these ends, were not prepared to 
levy war against the king, which appeared to them an act of 
treason and impiety. As soon as actual war broke out, the division 
of forces became more nearly equal. 

The political development from the outbreak of the Civil War 
to the establishment of Cromwell as Lord Protector followed the 
course which lias now become familiar but was then unprecedented. 
The Parliamentary party consisted of two factions, the Presby- 
terians and the Independents; the Presbyterians desired to 
preserve a State Church, but to abolish bishops; the Independents 
agreed with them about bishops, but held that each congregation 
should be free to choose its own theology, without the interference 
of any central ecclesiastical government. The Presbyterians, in 
the main, were of a higher social class than the Independents, 
and their political opinions were mont moderate. They wished to 
come to terms with the king as soon as defeat had made him 
conciliatory. Their policy, however, was rendered impossible by 
two circumstances: first, the king developed a martyr's qtubborn* 

fas 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

i about bishops; second, the defeat of the king proved difficult, 
and was only achieved by Cromwell's New Model Army, which 
consisted of Independents. Consequently, when the king's 
military resistance was broken, he could still not be induced to 
make a treaty, and the Presbyterians had lost the preponderance 
of armed force in the Parliamentary armies. The defence of 
democracy had thrown power into the hands of a minority, and 
it used its power with a complete disregard for democracy and 
parliamentary government When Charles I had attempted to 
arrest the five members, there had been a universal outcry, and 
his failure had made him ridiculous. But Cromwell had no such 
difficulties. By Pride's Purge, he dismissed about a hundred 
Presbyterian members, and obtained for a time a subservient 
majority. When, finally, he decided to dismiss Parliament alto- 
gether, "not a dog barked" war had made only military force 
seem important, and had produced a contempt for constitutional 
forms. For the rest of Cromwell's life, the government of England 
was a military tyranny, hated by an increasing majority of the 
nation, but impossible to shake off while his partisans alone were 
armed. 

Charles II, after hiding in oak trees and living as a refugee in 
Holland, determined, at the Restoration, that he would not again 
set out on his travels. This imposed a certain moderation. He 
claimed no power to impose taxes not sanctioned by Parliament. 
He assented to the Habeas Corpus Act, which deprived the Crown 
of the power of arbitrary arrest. On occasion he could flout the 
fiscal power of Parliament by means by subsidies from Louis XIV, 
but in the main he was a constitutional monarch. Most of the 
limitations of royal power originally desired by the opponents of 
Charles I were conceded at the Restoration, and were respected 
by Charles II because it had been shown that kings could be 
made to suffer at the hands of their subjects. 

James II, unlike his brother, was totally destitute of subtlety 
and finesse. By his bigoted Catholicism he united against himself 
the Anglicans and Nonconformists, in spite of his attempts to 
conciliate the latter by granting them toleration in defiance of 
Parliament. Foreign policy also played a part The Stuarts, in 
order to avoid the taxation required in war-time, which would 
have made them dependent upon Parliament, pursued a policy 
of subservience, first to Spain and then to France. The growing 

626 



PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM 

power of France roused the invariable English hostility to the 
leading Continental State, and the Revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes made Protestant feeling bitterly opposed to Louis XIV. 
In the end, almost everybody in England wished to be rid of 
James. But almost everybody was equally determined to avoid a 
return to the days of the Civil War and Cromwell's dictatorship. 
Since there was no constitutional way of getting rid of James, 
there must be a revolution, but it must be quickly ended, so as 
to give no opportunity for disruptive forces. The rights of Parlia- 
ment must be secured once for all. The king must go, but 
monarchy must be preserved; it should be, however, not a 
monarchy of Divine Right, but one dependent upon legislative 
sanction, and so upon Parliament. By a combination of aristocracy 
and big business, all this was achieved in a moment, without the 
necessity of firing a shot. Compromise and moderation had 
succeeded, after every form of intransigeance had been tried and 
had failed. 

The new king, being Dutch, brought with him the commercial 
and theological wisdom for which his country was noted. The 
Bank of England was created ; the national debt was made into a 
secure investment, no longer liable to repudiation at the caprice 
of the monarch. The Act of Toleration, while leaving Catholics 
and Nonconformists subject to various disabilities, put an end 
to actual persecution. Foreign policy became resolutely anti- 
French, and remained so, with brief intermissions, until the 
defeat of Napoleon. 



027 



Chapter XIII 
LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

JOHN LOCKE (1632-1704) is the apostle of the Revolution of 
1688, the most moderate and the most successful of all revo- 
lutions. Its aims were modest, but they were exactly achieved, 
no subsequent revolution has hitherto been found necessary 
in England. Locke faithfully embodies its spirit, and most of his 
works appeared within a few years of 1688. His chief work in 
theoretical philosophy, the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 
was finished in 1687 and published in 1690. His First Letter on 
Toleration was originally published in Latin in 1689, in Holland, 
to which country Locke had found it prudent to withdraw in 
1683. Two further letters on Toleration were published in 1690 and 
1692. His two Treatises on Government were licensed for printing 
in 1689, and published soon afterwards. His book on Education was 
published in 1693. Although his life was long, all his influential 
writings are confined to the few years from 1687 to 1693. Suc- 
cessful revolutions are stimulating to those who believe in them. 
Locke's father was a Puritan, who fought on the side of Parlia- 
ment. In the time of Cromwell, when Locke was at Oxford, the 
university was still scholastic in its philosophy; Locke disliked 
both scholasticism and the fanaticism of the Independents. He 
was much influenced by Descartes. He became a physician, and 
his patron was Lord Shaftesbury, Dryden's "Achitophel." When 
Shaftesbury fell in 1683, Locke fled with him to Holland, and 
remained there until the Revolution. After the Revolution, except 
for a few years during which he was employed at the Board of 
Trade, his life was devoted to literary work and to numerous 
controversies arising out of his books. 

The years before the Revolution of 1688, when Locke could 
not, without grave risk, take any part, theoretical or practical, 
in English politics, were spent by him in composing his Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding. This is his most important 
book, and the one upon which his fame most securely rests; but 
his influence on the philosophy of politics was so great and so 
lasting that he must be treated as the founder of philosophical 
liberalism as much as of empiricism in theory of knowledge. 

628 



LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

Locke is the most fortunate of all philosophers. He completed 
his work in theoretical philosophy just at the moment when the 
government of his country fell into the hands of men who shared 
his political opinions. Both in practice and in theory, the views 
which he advocated were held, for many years to come, by the 
mo$t vigorous and influential politicians and philosophers. His 
political doctrines, with the developments due to Montesquieu, 
are embedded in the American Constitution, and are to be seen 
at work whenever there is a dispute between President and 
Congress. The British Constitution was based upon his doctrines 
until about fifty years ago, and so was that which the French 
adopted in 1871. 

His influence in eighteenth-century France, which was immense, 
was primarily due to Voltaire, who as a young man spent some 
time in England, and interpreted English ideas to his compatriots 
in the Lettres pk*lo$opfttques. The pfclosophes and the moderate 
reformers followed him; the extreme revolutionaries followed 
Rousseau. His French followers, rightly or wrongly, believed in 
an intimate connection between his theory of knowledge and his 
politics. 

In England this connection is less evident. Of his two most 
eminent followers, Berkeley was politically unimportant, and 
Hume was a Tory who set forth his reactionary views in his 
History of England. But after the time of Kant, when German 
idealism began to influence English thought, there came to be 
again a connection between philosophy and politics: in the main, 
the philosophers who followed the Germans were Conservative, 
while the Benthamites, who were Radical, were in the tradition 
of Locke. The correlation, however, is not invariable; T. H. 
Green, for example, was a Liberal but an idealist. 

Not only Locke's valid opinions, but even his errors, were 
useful in practice. Take, for example, his doctrine as to primary 
and secondary qualities. The primary qualities are defined as 
those that are inseparable from body, and are enumerated as 
solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and number. The 
secondary qualities are all the rest: colours, sounds, smells, etc. 
The primary qualities, he maintainsf are actually in bodies; the 
secondary qualities, on the contrary, are only in the percipient. 
Without the eye, there would be no colours; without the ear, no 
sounds, and so on. For Locke's view as to secondary qualities 

629 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

there are good grounds jaundice, blue spectacles, etc. But 
Berkeley pointed out that the sairie arguments apply to primary 
qualities. Ever since Berkeley, Locke's dualism on this point has 
been philosophically out of date. Nevertheless, it dominated 
practical physics until the rise of quantum theory in our own 
day. Not only was it assumed, explicitly or tacitly, by physicists, 
but it proved fruitful as a source of many very important dis- 
coveries. The theory that the physical world consists only of 
matter in motion was the basis of the accepted theories of sound, 
heat, light, and electricity. Pragmatically, the theory was useful, 
however mistaken it may have been theoretically. This is typical 
of Locke's doctrines. 

Locke's philosophy, as it appears in the Essay, has throughout 
certain merits and certain demerits. Both alike were useful: the 
demerits are such only from a theoretical standpoint. He is always 
sensible, and always willing to sacrifice logic rather than become 
paradoxical. He enunciates general principles which, as the reader 
can hardly fail to perceive, are capable of leading to strange conse- 
quences; but whenever the strange consequences seem about to 
appear, Locke blandly refrains from drawing them. To a logician 
this is irritating; to a practical man, it is a proof of sound judg- 
ment. Since the world is what it is, it is clear that valid reasoning 
from sound principles cannot lead to error; but a principle may 
be so nearly true as to deserve theoretical respect, and yet may 
lead to practical consequences which we feel to be absurd. There 
is therefore a justification for common sense in philosophy, but 
only as showing that our theoretical principles cannot be quite 
correct so long as their consequences are condemned by an appeal 
to common sense which we feel to be irresistible. The theorist 
may retort that common sense is no more infallible than logic. 
But this retort, though made by Berkeley and Hume, would have 
been wholly foreign to Locke's intellectual temper. 

A characteristic of Locke, which descended from him to the 
whole Liberal movement, is lack of dogmatism. Some few cer- 
tainties he takes over from his predecessors: our own existence, 
the existence of God, and the truth of mathematics. But wherever 
his doctrines differ from those of his forerunners, they are to the 
effect that truth is hard to ascertain, and that a rational man will 
bold his opinions with some measure of doubt. This temper of 
mind is obviously connected with religious toleration, with the 

630 



LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

success of parliamentary democracy, with laissez-faire, and with 
the whole system of liberal maxims. Although he is a deeply 
religious man, a devout believer in Christianity who accepts 
revelation as a source of knowledge, he nevertheless hedges round 
professed revelations with rational safeguards. On one occasion 
he says : "The bare testimony of revelation is the highest certainty/' 
but on another he says: "Revelation must be judged by reason/ 9 
Thus in the end reason remains supreme. 

His chapter "Of Enthusiasm" is instructive in this connection. 
"Enthusiasm" had not then the same meaning as it has now; it 
meant the belief in a personal revelation to a religious leader or 
to his followers. It was a characteristic of the sects that had been 
defeated at the Restoration. When there is a multiplicity of such 
personal revelations, all inconsistent with each other, truth, or 
what passes as such, becomes purely personal, and loses its social 
character. Love of truth, which Locke considers essential, is a 
very different thing from love of some particular doctrine which 
is proclaimed as the truth. One unerring mark of love of truth, he 
says, is "not entertaining any proposition with greater assurance 
than the proofs it is built upon will warrant/' Forwardness to 
dictate, he says, shows failure of love of truth. "Enthusiasm 
laying by reason, would set up revelation without it; whereby in 
effect it takes away both reason and revelation, and substitutes in 
the room of it the ungrounded fancies of a man's own brain/' 
Men who suffer from melancholy or conceit are likely to have 
"persuasions of immediate intercourse with the Deity/' Hence 
odd actions and opinions acquire Divine sanction, which flatters 
"men's laziness, ignorance, and vanity/' He concludes the chapter 
with the maxim already quoted, that "revelation must be judged 
of by reason/' 

What Locke means by "reason" is to be gathered from his whole 
book. There is, it is true, a chapter called "Of Reason," but this is 
mainly concerned to prove that reason does not consist of syllo- 
gistic reasoning, and is summed up in the sentence: "God has 
not been so sparing to men to make them barely two-legged 
creatures, and left it to Aristotle to make them rational." Reason, 
as Locke uses the term, consists of t*o parts: first, an inquiry as 
to what things we know with certainty; second, an investigation 
of propositions which it is wise to accept in practice, although 
they have only probability and not certainty in their favour. "The 

631 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

grounds of probability," he says, "are two: conformity with our 
own experience, or the testimony of others' experience." The 
King of Siam, he remarks, ceased to believe what Europeans 
told him when they mentioned ice. 

In his chapter "Of Degrees of Assent" he says that the degree 
of assent we give to any proposition should depend upon the 
grounds of probability in its favour. After pointing out that we 
must often act upon probabilities that fall short of certainty, he 
says that the right use of this consideration "is mutual charity 
and forbearance. Since therefore it is unavoidable to the greatest 
part of men, if not all, to have several opinions, without certain 
and indubitable proofs of their truth ; and it carries too great an 
imputation of ignorance, lightness, or folly, for men to quit and 
renounce their former tenets presently upon the offer of an argu- 
ment which they cannot immediately answer and show the 
insufficiency of; it would, methinks, become all men to maintain 
peace and the common offices of humanity and friendship in the 
diversity of opinions, since we cannot reasonably expect that any 
one should readily and obsequiously quit his own opinion, and 
embrace ours with a blind resignation to an authority which the 
understanding of man acknowledges not. For, however it may 
often mistake, it can own no other guide but reason, nor blindly 
submit to the will and dictates of another. If he you would bring 
over to your sentiments be one that examines before he assents, 
you must give him leave at his leisure to go over the account 
again, and, recalling what is out of his mind, examine the parti- 
culars, to see on which side the advantage lies; and if he will not 
think over arguments of weight enough to engage him anew in 
so much pains, it is but what we do often ourselves in the like 
case; and we should take it amiss if others should prescribe to 
us what points we should study: and if he be one who wishes to 
take his opinions upon trust, how can we imagine that he should 
renounce those tenets which time and custom have so settled in 
his mind that he thinks them self-evident, and of an unquestion- 
able certainty; or which he takes to be impressions he has 
received from God himself, or from men sent by him? How can 
we expect, I say, that opinions thus settled should be given up to 
the arguments or authority of a stranger or adversary? especially 
if there be any suspicion of interest or design, as there never fails 
to be where men find themselves ill-treated. We should do well 

632 



LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

to commiserate our mutual ignorance, and endeavour to remove 
it in all the gentle and fair ways of information, and not instantly 
treat others ill as obstinate and perverse because they will not 
renounce their own and receive our opinions, or at least those 
we would force upon them, when it is more than probable that 
we are no less obstinate in not embracing some of theirs. For 
where is the man that has uncontestable evidence of the truth of 
all that he holds, or of the falsehood of all he condemns; or can 
say, that he has examined to the bottom all his own or other 
men's opinions? The necessity of believing without knowledge, 
nay often upon very slight grounds, in this fleeting state of action 
and blindness we are in, should make us more busy and careful 
to inform ourselves than to restrain others. . . . There is reason 
to think, that if men were better instructed themselves, they 
would be less imposing on others." 1 

I have dealt hitherto only with the latest chapters of the Essay, 
where Locke is drawing the moral from his earlier theoretical 
investigation of the nature and limitations of human knowledge. 
It is time now to examine what he has to say on this more purely 
philosophical subject. 

Locke is, as a rule, contemptuous of metaphysics. A propos of 
some speculation of Leibniz's, he writes to a friend: "You and 
I have had enough of this kind of fiddling." The conception of 
substance, which was dominant in the metaphysics of his time, 
he considers vague and not useful, but he does not venture to 
reject it wholly. He allows the validity of metaphysical arguments 
for the existence of God, but he does not dwell on them, and seems 
somewhat uncomfortable about them. Whenever he is expressing 
new ideas, and not merely repeating what is traditional, he thinks 
in terms of concrete detail rather than of large abstractions. His 
philosophy is piecemeal, like scientific work, not statuesque and 
all of a piece, like the great Continental systems of the seventeenth 
century. 

Locke may be regarded as the founder of empiricism, which is 
the doctrine that all our knowledge (with the possible exception 
of logic and mathematics) is derived from experience. Accordingly 
the first book of the Essay is concerned^ arguing, as against Plato, 
Descartes, and the scholastics, that there are no innate ideas or 
principles. In the second book he sets to work to show, in detail, 

1 Ettay Canctrmw Human Undcntandinx, Book IV, chap, xvi, tec. 4. 

633 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

how experience gives rise to various kinds of ideas. Having rejected 
innate ideas, he says: 

"Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper, 
void of all characters, without any ideas; how comes it to be 
furnished? Whence comes it by that vast store, which the busy 
and boundless fancy of man has painted on it with an almost 
endless variety? Whence has it all the materials of reason and 
knowledge? To this I answer in one word, from experience: in 
that all our knowledge is founded, and from that it ultimately 
derives itself" (Book II, chap, i, sec. 2). 

Our ideas are derived from two sources, (a) sensation, and 
(b) perception of the operation of our own mind, which may be 
called "internal sense." Since we can only think by means of 
ideas, and since all ideas come from experience, it is evident that 
none of our knowledge can antedate experience. 

Perception, he says, is "the first step and degree towards know- 
ledge, and the inlet of all the materials of it." This may seem, to 
a modern, almost a truism, since it has become part of educated 
common sense, at least in English-speaking countries. But in his 
day the mind was supposed to know all sorts of things a priori, 
and the complete dependence of knowledge upon perception, 
which he proclaimed, was a new and revolutionary doctrine. Plato, 
in the Theaetetus, had set to work to refute the identification of 
knowledge with perception, and from his time onwards almost 
all philosophers, down to and including Descartes and Leibniz, 
had taught that much of our most valuable knowledge is not 
derived from experience. Locke's thorough-going empiricism was, 
therefore a bold innovation. 

The third book of the Essay deals with words, and is concerned, 
in the main, to show that what metaphysicians present as know- 
ledge about the world is purely verbal. Chapter III, "Of General 
Terms," takes up an extreme nominalist position on the subject 
of universal*. All things that exist are particulars, but we can 
frame general ideas, such as "man," that are applicable to many 
particulars, and to these general ideas we can give names. Their 
generality consists solely in the fact that they are, or may be, 
applicable to a variety of particular things; in their own being, as 
ideas in our minds, they are just as particular as everything else 
that exists. 

Chapter VI of Book III, "Of the Names of Substances," is con* 

634 



LOCKE'S THEORY Of KNOWLEDGE 

cerned to refute the scholastic doctrine of essence. Things may 
have a real essence, which will consist of their physical constitution, 
but this is in the main unknown to us, and is not the "essence" 
of which scholastics speak. Essence, as we can know it, is purely 
verbal ; it consists merely in the definition of a general term. To 
argue, for instance, as to whether the essence of body is only 
extension, or is extension plus solidity, is to argue about words: 
we may define the word "body" either way, and no harm can 
result so long as we adhere to our definition. Distinct species are 
not a fact of nature, but of language; they are "distinct complex 
ideas with distinct names annexed to them." There are, it is true, 
differing things in nature, but the differences proceed by con- 
tinuous gradations: "the boundaries of the species, whereby men 
sort them, are made by men." He proceeds to give instances of 
monstrosities, concerning which it was doubtful whether they were 
men or not. This point of view was not generally accepted until 
Darwin persuaded men to adopt the theory of evolution by gradual 
changes. Only those who have allowed themselves to be afflicted 
by the scholastics will realize how much metaphysical lumber it 
sweeps away. 

Empiricism and idealism alike are faced with a problem to 
which, so far, philosophy has found no satisfactory solution. This 
is the problem of showing how we have knowledge of other things 
than ourself and the operations of our own mind. Locke considers 
this problem, but what he says is very obviously unsatisfactory. 
In one place 1 we are told: "Since the mind, in all its thoughts and 
reasonings, hath no other immediate object but its own ideas, 
which it alone does or can contemplate, it is evident that our 
knowledge is only conversant about them." And again: "Know- 
ledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of two 
ideas." From this it would seem to follow immediately that we 
cannot know of the existence of other people, or of the physical 
world, for these, if they exist, are not merely ideas in my mind. 
Each one of us, accordingly, must, so far as knowledge is Con- 
cerned, be shut up in himself, and cut off from all contact with 
the outer world. 

This, however, is a paradox, and ixfcke will have nothing to do 
with paradoxes. Accordingly, in another chapter, he sets forth a 
different theory, quite inconsistent with the earlier one. We have, 
Op. nl., Book IV, chap. i. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

be tells us, three kinds of knowledge of real existence. Our know- 
ledge of our own existence is intuitive, our knowledge of God's 
existence is demonstrative, and our knowledge of things present 
to sense is sensitive (Book IV, chap. iii). 

In the next chapter, he becomes more or less aware of the 
inconsistency. He suggests that someone might say: "If knowledge 
consists in agreement of ideas, the enthusiast and the sober man 
are on a level." He replies: "Not so where ideas agree with things." 
He proceeds to argue that all simple ideas must agree with things, 
since "the mind, as has been showed, can by no means make to 
itself 9 any simple ideas, these being ail "the product of things 
operating on the mind in a natural way." And as regards complex 
ideas of substances, "all our complex ideas of them must be such, 
and such only, as are made up of such simple ones as have been 
discovered to coexist in nature." Again, we can have no knowledge 
except (i) by intuition, (2) by reason, examining the agreement 
or disagreement of two ideas, (3) "by sensation, perceiving the 
existence of particular things" (Book IV, chap, iii, sec. 2). 

In all this, Locke assumes it known that certain mental occur- 
rences, which he calls sensations, have causes outside themselves, 
and that these causes, at least to some extent and in certain respects, 
resemble the sensations which are their effects. But how, con- 
sistently with the principles of empiricism, is this to be known ? 
We experience the sensations, but not their causes; our experience 
will be exactly the same if our sensations arise spontaneously. The 
belief that sensations have causes, and still more the belief that 
they resemble their causes, is one which, if maintained, must be 
maintained on grounds wholly independent of experience. The 
view that "knowledge is the perception of the agreement or dis- 
agreement of two ideas" is the one that Locke is entitled to, and 
his escape from the paradoxes that it entails is effected by means 
of an inconsistency so gross that only his resolute adherence to 
common sense could have made him blind to it. 

This difficulty has troubled empiricism down to the present 
day. Hume got rid of it by dropping the assumption that sensations 
have external causes, but even he retained this assumption when- 
ever he forgot his own principles, which was very often. His 
fundamental maxim, "no idea without an antecedent impression," 
which he takes over from Locke, is only plausible so long as we 
think of impressions as having outside causes, which the very 

636 



LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

word "impression" irresistibly suggests. And at the moments 
when Hume achieves some degree of consistency he is wildly 
paradoxical. 

No one has yet succeeded in inventing a philosophy at once 
credible and self-consistent. Locke aimed at credibility, and 
achieved it at the expense of consistency. Most of the great philo- 
sophers have done the opposite. A philosophy which is not self- 
consistent cannot be wholly true, but a philosophy which is self- 
consistent can very well be wholly false. The most fruitful philo- 
sophies have contained glaring inconsistencies, but for that very 
reason have been partially true. There is no reason to suppose 
that a self-consistent system contains more truth than one which, 
like Locke's, is obviously more or less wrong. 

Locke's ethical doctrines are interesting, partly on their own 
account, partly as an anticipation of Bentham. When I speak of 
his ethical doctrines, I do not mean his moral disposition as a 
practical man, but his general theories as to how men act and how 
they should act. Like Bentham, Locke was a man filled with 
kindly feeling, who yet held that everybody (including himself) 
must always be moved, in action, solely by desire for his own 
happiness or pleasure. A few quotations will make this clear. 

4 'Things are good or evil only in relation to pleasure or pain. 
That we call 'good' which is apt to cause or increase pleasure, or 
diminish pain, in us." 

"What is it moves desire? I answer, happiness, and that alone." 

44 Happiness, in its full extent, is the utmost pleasure we are 
capable of." 

"The necessity of pursuing true happiness [is] the foundation 
of ail liberty. 

"The preference of vice to virtue [is] a manifest wrong judg- 
ment." 

"The government of our passions [is] the right improvement 
of liberty." 1 

The last of these statements depends, it would seem, uponlhe 
doctrine of rewards and punishments in the next world. God has 
aid down certain moral rules ; those who follow them go to heaven, 
and those who break them risk going to hell. The prudent pleasure- 
seeker will therefore be virtuous. With the decay of the belief that 
sin leads to hell, it has become more difficult to make a purely 
1 The above quotations are from Book II, chap. xx. 

637 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

self-regarding argument in favour of a virtuous life. Bentham, 
who was a free-thinker, substituted the human lawgiver in place 
of God: it was the business of laws and social institutions to make 
a harmony between public and private interests, so that each man, 
in pursuing his own happiness, should be compelled to minister 
to the general happiness. But this is less satisfactory than the 
reconciliation of public and private interests effected by means 
of heaven and hell, both because lawgivers are not always wise 
or virtuous, and because human governments are not omniscient. 

Locke has to admit, what is obvious, that men do not always act 
in the way which, on a rational calculation, is likely to secure them 
a maximum of pleasure. We value present pleasure more than 
future pleasure, and pleasure in the near future more than pleasure 
in the distant future. It may be said this is not said by Locke 
that the rate of interest is a quantitative measure of the general 
discounting of future pleasures. If the prospect of spending i ,000 
a year hence were as delightful as the thought of spending it to-day, 
I should not need to be paid for postponing my pleasure. Locke 
admits that devout believers often commit sins which, by their 
own creed, put them in danger of hell. We all know people who 
put off going to the dentist longer than they would if they were 
engaged in the rational pursuit of pleasure. Thus, even if pleasure 
or the avoidance of pain be our motive, it must be added that 
pleasures lose their attractiveness and pains their terrors in propor- 
tion to their distance in the future. 

Since it is only in the long run that, according to Locke, self- 
interest and the general interest coincide, it becomes important 
that men should be guided, as far as possible, by their long-run 
interests. That is to say, men should be prudent. Prudence is the 
one virtue which remains to be preached, for every lapse from 
virtue is a failure of prudence* Emphasis on prudence is charac- 
teristic of liberalism. It is connected with the rise of capitalism, 
for the prudent became rich while the imprudent became or 
regained poor. It is connected also with certain forms of Protes- 
tant piety: virtue with a view to heaven is psychologically very 
analogous to saving with a view to investment. 

Belief in the harmony between private and public interests is 
characteristic of liberalism, and long survived the theological 
foundation that it had in Locke. 

Locke states that liberty depends upon the necessity of pursuing 

638 



LOCKE'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

% 

true happiness and upon the government of our passions. This 
opinion he derives from his doctrine that private and public in- 
terests are identical in the long run, though not necessarily over 
short periods. It follows from this doctrine that, given a com- 
munity of citizens who are all both pious and prudent, they will 
all act, given liberty, in a manner to promote the general good. 
There will be no need of human laws to restrain them, since 
divine laws will suffice. The hitherto virtuous man who is tempted 
to become a highwayman will say to himself: "I might escape 
the human magistrate, but I could not escape punishment at the 
hands of the Divine Magistrate." He will accordingly renounce 
his nefarious schemes, and live as virtuously as if he were sure 
of being caught by the police. Legal liberty, therefore, is only 
completely possible where both prudence and piety are universal ; 
elsewhere, the restraints imposed by the criminal law are indis- 
pensable. 

Locke states repeatedly that morality is capable of demonstra- 
tion, but he does not develop this idea so fully as could be wished. 
The most important passage is: 

"Morality capable of demonstration. The idea of a Supreme 
Being, infinite in power, goodness, and wisdom, whose workman- 
ship we are, and on whom we depend ; and the idea of ourselves, 
as understanding, rational beings, being such as are clear in us, 
would, I suppose, if duly considered and pursued, afford such 
foundations of our duty and rules of action as might place morality 
among the sciences capable of demonstration: wherein I doubt 
not, but from self-evident propositions, by necessary consequences, 
as incontestable as those in mathematics, the measures of right 
and wrong might be made out, to any one that will apply himself 
with the same indifferency and attention to the one as he does 
to the other of these sciences. The relation of other modes may 
certainly be perceived, as well as those of number and extension: 
and I cannot see why they should not also be capable of demon- 
stration, if due methods were thought on to examine or pulfeue 
their agreement or disagreement. 'Where there is no property, 
there is no injustice,' is a proposition as certain as any demon- 
stration in Euclid: for the idea of property being a right to any- 
thing, and the idea to which the name 'injustice* is given being the 
invasion or violation of that right, it is evident that these ideas 
being thus established, and these names annexed to them, I can 

639 



WB8TBRN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as certainly know this proposition to be true as that a triangle has 
three angles equal to two right ones. Again : 'No government allows 
absolute liberty 9 : the idea of government being the establishment 
of society upon certain rules or laws, which require conformity 
to them; and the idea of absolute liberty being for any one to do 
whatever he pleases: I am as capable of being certain of the truth 
of this proposition as of any in the mathematics." 1 

This passage is puzzling because, at first, it seems to make moral 
rules dependent upon God's decrees, while in the instances that 
are given it is suggested that moral rules are analytic. I suppose 
that, in fact, Locke thought some parts of ethics analytic and others 
dependent upon God's decrees. Another puzzle is that the in- 
stances given do not seem to be ethical propositions at all. 

There is another difficulty which one could wish to see con- 
sidered. It is generally held by theologians that God's decrees are 
not arbitrary, but are inspired by His goodness and wisdom. This 
requires that there should be some concept of goodness antecedent 
to God's decrees, which has led Him to make just those decrees 
rather than any others. What this concept may be, it is impossible 
to discover from Locke. What he says is that a prudent man will 
act in such and such ways, since otherwise God will punish him; 
but he leaves us completely in the dark as to why punishment 
should be attached to certain acts rather than to their opposites. 

Locke's ethical doctrines are, of course, not defensible. Apart 
from the fact that there is something revolting in a system which 
regards prudence as the only virtue, there are other, less emotional, 
objections to his theories. 

In the first place, to say that men only desire pleasure is to pu\ 
the can before the horse. Whatever I may happen to desire, 1 shall 
feel pleasure in obtaining it; but as a rule the pleasure is due to 
the desire, not the desire to the pleasure. It is possible, as happens 
with masochists, to desire pain ; in that case, there is still pleasure 
in the gratification of the desire, but it is mixed with its opposite. 
EvtSn in Locke's own doctrine, it is not pleasure as such that is 
desired, since a proximate pleasure is more desired than a remote 
one. If morality is to be deduced from the psychology of desire, 
as Locke and his disciple* attempt to do, there can be no reason 
for deprecating the discounting of distant pleasures, or for urging 
prudence as a moral duty. His itgument, in a nutshell, is: "We 
1 Op. eit,, Book IV, chap, lit, tec. 18. 

640 



LOCKE'S THEORT OF KNOWLEDGE 

only desire pleasure. But, in fact, many men desire, not pleasure 
as such, but proximate pleasure. This contradicts our doctrine 
that they desire pleasure as such, and is therefore wicked." Almost 
all philosophers, in their ethical systems, first lay down a false 
doctrine, and then argue that wickedness consists in acting in a 
manner that proves it false, which would be impossible if the 
doctrine were true. Of this pattern Locke affords an example. 



/ U'*ti<** WtJcnof Ay 64! 



Chapter XIV 
LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

(a) THE HEREDITARY PRINCIPLE 

IN the years 1689 and 1690, just after the Revolution of 1688, 
Locke wrote his two Treatises on Government, of which the 
second especially is very important in the history of political 
ideas. 

The first of these two treatises is a criticism of the doctrine of 
hereditary power. It is a reply to Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha: or 
The Natural Power of Kings, which was published in 1680, but 
written under Charles I. Sir Robert Filmer, who was a devout 
upholder of the divine right of kings, had the misfortune to live till 
1653, and must have suffered acutely from the execution of 
Charles I and the victory of Cromwell. But Patriarcha was written 
before these sad events, though not before the Civil War, so that 
it naturally shows awareness of the existence of subversive doc- 
trines. Such doctrines, as Filmer points out, were not new in 1640. 
In fact, both Protestant and Catholic divines, in their contest with 
Catholic and Protestant monarchs respectively, had vigorously 
affirmed the right of subjects to resist tyrannical princes, and their 
writings supplied Sir Robert with abundant material for controversy. 
Sir Robert Filmer was knighted by Charles 1, and his house is 
said to have been plundered by the Parliamentarians ten times. 
He thinks it not unlikely that Noah sailed up the Mediterranean 
and allotted Africa, Asia, and Europe to Ham, Shcm, and Japheth 
respectively. He held that, by the English Constitution, the Lords 
only give counsel to the king, and the Commons have even less 
power; the king, he says, alone makes the laws, which proceed 
solely from his will. The king, according to Filmer, is per- 
fediy free from all human control, and cannot be bound by the 
acts of his predecessors, or even by his own, for ''impossible it 
is in nature that a man should give a law unto himself.' 1 

Filmer, as these opinion! show, belonged to the most extreme 
section of the Divine Right party. 

Patriarcha begins by combating the "common opinion" that 
"mankind is naturally endowed and bora with freedom from all 

642 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

subjection, and at liberty to choose what form of government it 
please, and the power which any one man hath over others was 
first bestowed according to the discretion of the multitude." "This 
tenet," he says, "was first hatched in the schools." The truth, 
according to him, is quite different; it is, that originally God 
bestowed the kingly power upon Adam, from whom it descended 
to his heirs, and ultimately reached the various monarchs of modern 
times. Kings now, he assures us, "either are, or are to be reputed, 
the next heirs to those first progenitors who were at first the natural 
parents of the whole people." Our first parent, it seems, did not 
adequately appreciate his privilege as universal monarch, for "the 
desire of liberty was the first cause of the fall of Adam." The desire 
of liberty is a sentiment which Sir Robert Kilmer regards as 
impious. 

The claims made by Charles I, and by his protagonists on his 
behalf, were in excess of what earlier times would have conceded 
to kings. Filmer points out that Parsons, the English Jesuit, and 
Buchanan, the Scotch Calvinist, who agree in almost nothing else, 
both maintain that sovereigns can be deposed by the people for 
misgovernment. Parsons, of course, was thinking of the Protestant 
Queen Elizabeth, and Buchanan of the Catholic Mary Queen of 
Scots. The doctrine of Buchanan was sanctioned by success, but 
that of Parsons was disproved by his colleague Campion's execution. 

Even before the Reformation, theologians tended to believe in 
setting limits to kingly power. This was part of the battle between 
the Church and the State which raged throughout Europe during 
most of the Middle Ages. In this battle, the State depended upon 
armed force, the Church upon cleverness and sanctity. As long as 
the Church had both these merits, it won ; when it came to have 
cleverness only, it lost. But the things which eminent and holy 
men had said against the power of kings remained on record. 
Though intended in the interests of the Pope, they could be used 
to support the rights of the people to self-government. "The subtle 
schoolmen," says Fiiiner, "to be sure to thrust down the^hig 
below the Pope, thought it the safest course to advance the people 
above the king, so that the papal power might take the place of the 
regal." He quotes the theologian Bellafrmine as saying that secular 
power is bestowed by men (i.e. not by God), and "is in the people 
unless they bestow it on a prince"; thus Bellarmine, according to 
Filmer, "makes God the immediate author of a democratic*! 

643 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

estate" which sounds to him as shocking as it would to a modern 
plutocrat to say that God is the immediate author of Bolshevism. 

Filmer derives political power, not from any contract, nor yet 
from any consideration of the public good, but entirely from the 
authority of a father over his children. His view is: that the source 
of regal authority is subjection of children to parents; that the 
patriarchs in Genesis were monarchs; that kings are the heirs of 
Adam, or at least are to be regarded as such ; that the natural rights 
of a king are the same as those of a father ; and that, by nature, sons 
are never free of paternal power, even when the son is adult and 
the parent is in his dotage. 

This whole theory seems to a modern mind so fantastic that it is 
hard to believe it was seriously maintained. We are not accustomed 
to deriving political rights from the story of Adam and Eve. We 
hold it obvious that parental power should cease completely when 
the son or daughter reaches the age of twenty-one, and that before 
that it should be very strictly limited both by die State and by the 
right of independent initiative which the young have gradually 
acquired. We recognize that the mother has rights at least equal 
to those of the father. But apart from all these considerations, it 
would not occur to any modern man outside Japan to suppose that 
political power should be in any way assimilated to that of parents 
over children. In Japan, it is true, a theory closely similar to 
Filmer's is still held, and must be taught by all professors and 
school-teachers. The Mikado can trace his descent from the Sun 
Goddess, whose heir he is; other Japanese are also descended from 
her, but belong to cadet branches of her family. Therefore the 
Mikado is divine, and all resistance to him is impious. This theory 
was, in the main, invented in 1868, but is now alleged in Japan 
to have been handed down by tradition ever since the creation of 
the world. 

The attempt to impose a similar theory upon Europe of which 
attempt Filmer's Patriarchs is part was a failure. Why? The 
aobptance of such a theory is in no way repugnant to human 
nature; for example, it was held, apart from Japan, by the ancient 
Egyptians, and by the Mexicans and Peruvians before the Spanish 
conquest. At a certain stage of human development it is natural. 
Stuart England had passed this stage, but modern Japan has not. 

The defeat of theories of divine right, in England, was due to 
two main causes. One was the multiplicity of religions; the other 

644 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

was the conflict for power between the monarchy, the aristocracy, 
and the higher bourgeoisie. As for religion: the king, since the 
reign of Henry VIII, was the head of the Church of England, which 
was opposed both to Rome and to most of the Protestant sects. 
The Church of England boasted of being a compromise: the Pre- 
face to the Authorized Version begins "It hath been the wisdom 
of the Church of England, ever since the first compiling of her 
public liturgy, to keep the mean between two extremes." On the 
whole this compromise suited most people. Queen Mary and King 
James II tried to drag the country over to Rome, and the victors 
in the Civil War tried to drag it over to Geneva, but these attempts 
failed, and after 1688 the power of the Church of England was 
unchallenged. Nevertheless, its opponents survived. The Non- 
conformists, especially, were vigorous men, and were numerous 
among the rich merchants and bankers whose power was con- 
tinually increasing. 

The theological position of the king was somewhat peculiar, for 
he was not only head of the Church of England, but also of the 
Church of Scotland. In England, he had to believe in bishops and 
reject Calvinism; in Scotland, he had to reject bishops and believe 
in Calvinism. The Stuarts had genuine religious convictions, which 
made this ambiguous attitude impossible for them, and caused 
them even more trouble in Scotland than in England. But after 
1688 political convenience led kings to acquiesce in professing two 
religions at once. This militated against zeal, and made it difficult 
to regard them as divine persons. In any case, neither Catholics 
nor Nonconformists could acquiesce in any religious claims on 
behalf of the monarchy. 

The three parties of king, aristocracy, and rich middle class made 
different combinations at different times. Under Edward IV and 
Louis XI, king and middle class combined against the aristocracy; 
under Louis XIV, king and aristocracy combined against the mid- 
dle class; in England in 1688, aristocracy and middle class Com- 
bined against the king. When the king had one of the other paraes 
on his side, he was strong; when they combined against him, he 
was weak. 

For these reasons among others, lx>cke had no difficulty in 
demolishing Kilmer's arguments. * 

So far as reasoning is concerned, Locke has, of course, an easy 
task. He points out that, if parental power is what is concerned, 

645 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

the mother's power should be equal to the father's. He lays stress 
on the injustice of primogeniture, which is unavoidable if inheri- 
tance is to be the basis of monarchy. He makes play with the 
absurdity of supposing that actual monarchs are, in any real sense, 
the heirs of Adam. Adam can have only one heir, but no one knows 
who he is. Would Filmer maintain, he asks, that, if the true heir 
could be discovered, all existing monarchs should lay their crowns 
at his feet ? If Filmer 's basis for monarchy were accepted, all kings, 
except at most one, would be usurpers, and would have no right 
to demand the obedience of their de facto subjects. Moreover 
paternal power, he says, is temporary, and extends not to life or 
property. 

For such reasons, apart from more fundamental grounds, here- 
dity cannot, according to Locke, be accepted as the basis of legiti- 
mate political power. Accordingly, in his Second Treatise on 
Government he seeks a more defensible basis. 

The hereditary principle has almost vanished from politics. 
During my lifetime, the emperors of Brazil, China, Russia, Ger- 
many, and Austria have disappeared, to be replaced by dictators 
who do not aim at the foundation of a hereditary dynasty. Aris- 
tocracy has lost its privileges throughout Europe, except in Eng- 
land, where they have become little more than a historical form. 
All this, in most countries, is very recent, and has much to do with 
the rise of dictatorships, since the traditional basis of power has 
been swept away, and the habits of mind required for the successful 
practice of democracy have not had time to grow up. There is one 
great institution that has never had any hereditary element, 
namely, the Catholic Church. We may expect the dictatorships, 
if they survive, to develop gradually a form of government analo- 
gous to that of the Church. This has already happened in the case 
of the great corporations in America, which have, or had until Pearl 
Harbour, powers almost equal to those of the government. 

It s curious that the rejection of the hereditary principle in 
pduttcs has had almost no effect in the economic sphere in demo- 
cratic countries. (In totalitarian states, economic power has been 
absorbed by political power) We still think it natural that a man 
should leave his property to his children; that is to say, we accept 
the hereditary prixmple as regards economic power while rejecting 
it as regards political poWer. Political dynasties have disappeared, 
but economic dynasties survive. I am not at the moment arguing 

646 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

either for or against this different treatment of the two forms of 
power; I am merely pointing out that it exists, and that most men 
are unconscious of it. When you consider how natural it seems 
to us that the power over the lives of others resulting from great 
wealth should be hereditary, you will understand better how men 
like Sir Robert Filmer could take the same view as regards the 
power of kings, and how important was the innovation represented 
by men who thought as Locke did. 

To understand how Filmer's theory could be believed, and how 
Locke's contrary theory could seem revolutionary, we have only 
to reflect that a kingdom was regarded then as a landed estate is 
regarded now. The owner of land has various important legal 
rights, the chief of which is the power of choosing who shall be 
on the land. Ownership can be transmitted by inheritance and 
we feel that the man who has inherited an estate has a just claim 
to all the privileges that the law allows him in consequence. Yet 
at bottom his position is the same as that of the monarchs whose 
claims Sir Robert Filmer defends. There are at the present day 
in California a number of huge estates the title to which is derived 
from actual or alleged grants by the king of Spain. He was only 
in a position to make such grants (a) because Spain accepted views 
similar to Filmer's, and (b) because the Spaniards were able to 
defeat the Indians in battle. Nevertheless we hold the heirs of 
those to whom he made grants to have a just title. Perhaps in future 
this will seem as fantastic as Filmer seems now. 



B. THE STATE OP NATURE, AND NATURAL LAW 

Ixxrke begins his second Treatise on Government by saying that, 
having shown the impossibility of deriving the authority of govern- 
ment from that of a father, he will now set forth what he conceives 
to be the true origin of government. 

He begins by supposing what he calls a "state of nature, "Ante- 
cedent to all human government. In this state there is a "lav?Sf 
nature," but the law of nature consists of divine commands, and 
is not imposed by any human legislator. It is not clear how far the 
state of nature is, for Locke, a mere'illustrative hypothesis, and 
how far he supposes it to have had a historical existence; but I am 
afraid that he tended to think of it as a stage that had actually 
occurred. Men emerged from the state of nature by means of a 

64? 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

social contract which instituted civil government. This also he 
regarded as more or less historical. But for the moment it is the 
state of nature that concerns us. 

What Locke has to say about the state of nature and the law 
of nature is, in the main, not original, but a repetition of medieval 
scholastic doctrines. Thus St. Thomas Aquinas says: 

"Every law framed by man bears the character of a law exactly 
to that extent to which it is derived from the law of nature. But if 
on any point it is in conflict with the law of nature, it at once ceases 
to be a law; it is a mere perversion of law." 1 

Throughout the Middle Ages, the law of nature was held to 
condemn "usury/ 9 i.e. lending money at interest. Church property 
was almost entirely in land, and landowners have always been 
borrowers rather than lenders. But when Protestantism arose, its 
support especially the support of Calvinism came chiefly from 
the rich middle class, who were lenders rather than borrowers. 
Accordingly first Calvin, then other Protestants, and finally the 
Catholic Church, sanctioned "usury." Thus natural law came to 
be differently conceived, but no one doubted there being such 
a thing. 

Many doctrines which survived the belief in natural law owe 
their origin to it; for example, laissez-faire and the rights of man. 
These doctrines are connected, and both have their origins in 
puritanism. Two quotations given by Tawney will illustrate this. 
A committee of the House of Commons in 1604 stated: 

"All free subjects are born inheritable, as to their land, and also 
as to the free exercise of their industry, in those trades whereto 
they apply themselves and whereby they are to live." 

And in 1656 Joseph Lee writes: 

"It is an undeniable maxim that every one by the light of nature 

and reason will do that which makes for his greatest advantage 

The advancement of private persons will be the advantage of the 

pubpc-" 

Except for the words "by the light of nature and reason/' this 
might have been written in the nineteenth century. 

In Locke's theory of government, 1 repeat, there is little that 

is original. In this Locke Asembles most of the men who have 

won fame for their ideas. As a rule, the man who first thinks of 

a new idea is so much ahead of his time that everyone thinks him 

1 Quotrd by Tawney in Religion and iht Rut of Capitalism. 

64* 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

silly, so that he remains obscure and is soon forgotten. Then, 
gradually, the world becomes ready for the idea, and the man who 
proclaims it at the fortunate moment gets all the credit. So it was, 
for example, with Darwin ; poor Lord Monboddo was a laughing- 
stock. 

In regard to the state of nature, Locke was less original than 
Hobbes, who regarded it as one in which there was war of all 
against all, and life was nasty, brutish, and short. But Hobbes was 
reputed an atheist. The view of the state of nature and of natural 
law which Locke accepted from his predecessors cannot be freed 
from its theological basis; where it survives without this, as in 
much modern liberalism, it is destitute of clear logical foundation. 

The belief in a happy "state of nature" in the remote past 
is derived partly from the biblical narrative of the age of the 
patriarchs, partly from the classical myth of the golden age. The 
general belief in the badness of the remote past only came with 
the doctrine of evolution. 

The nearest thing to a definition of the state of nature to be found 
in Locke is the following: 

"Men living together according to reason, without a common 
superior on earth, with authority to judge between them, is properly 
the state of nature.'* 

This is not a description of the life of savages, but of an imagined 
community of virtuous anarchists, who need no police or law-courts 
because they always obey "reason," which is the same as "natural 
law,*' which, in turn, consists of those laws of conduct that are held 
to have a divine origin. (For example, "Thou shalt not kill" is part 
of natural law, but the rule of the roads is not.) 

Some further quotations will make Locke's meaning clearer. 

"To understand political power right [he says], and derive it 
from its original, we must consider what state men are naturally 
in, and that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions and 
dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within 
the bounds of the law of nature ; without asking leave, or dependTSg 
upon the will of any other man. 

"A state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction 
is reciprocal, no one having more than toother ; there being nothing 
more evident, than that creatures of the same species and rank, 
promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the 
use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another 

649 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

without subordination or subjection; unless the lord and master 
of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one 
above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appoint- 
ment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty. 

"But though this [the state of nature] be a state of liberty, yet 
it is not a state of licence: though man in that state has an uncon- 
trollable liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has 
not liberty to destroy himself, or so much as any creature in his 
possession, but where some nobler use than its bare preservation 
calls for it. The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, 
which obliges every one; and reason, which is that law, teaches 
all mankind, who will but consult it, that being all equal and 
independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, 
liberty, or possessions 9 ' 1 (for we are all God's property). 2 

It presently appears, however, that, where most men are in the 
state of nature, there may nevertheless be some men who do not 
live according to the law of nature, and that the law of nature 
provides, up to a point, what may be done to resist such criminals. 
In a state of nature, we are told, every man can defend himself and 
what is his. "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood 
be shed" is part of the law of nature. I may even kill a thief while 
he is engaged in stealing my property, and this right survives the 
institution of government, although, where there is government, 
if the thief gets away I must renounce private vengeance and 
resort to the law. 

The great objection to the state of nature is that, while it persists, 
every man is the judge in his own cause, since he must rely upon 
himself for the defence of his rights. For this evil, government is 
the remedy, but this is not a natural remedy. The state of nature, 
according to Locke, was evaded by a compact to create a govern- 
ment. Not any compact ends the state of nature, but only 
that of making one body politic. The various governments of 
independent States are now in a state of nature towards each 



The state of nature, we are told in a passage presumably directed 
against Hobbes, is not the same as a state of war, but more nearly 
its opposite. After explaining the right to kill a thief, on the ground 

1 Cf. the Declaration of Independence. 

1 "They are his property, whose workmanship they are, made to latt 
during bit, not mother*! pleasure." 

650 



LOCKE'S POLITJCAL PHILOSOPHY 

that the thief may be deemed to be making war upon me, Locke 
says: 

"And here we have the plain 'difference between the state of 
nature and the state of war/ which, however some men have con- 
founded, are as far distant, as a state of peace, goodwill, mutual 
assistance and preservation, and a state of enmity, malice, violence 
and mutual destruction are from one another. " 

Perhaps the law of nature must be regarded as having a wider 
scope than the state of nature, since the former deals with thieves 
and murderers, while in the latter there are no such malefactors. 
This, at least, suggests a way out of an apparent inconsistency in 
Locke, consisting in his sometimes representing the state of nature 
as one where everyone is virtuous, and at other times discussing 
what may rightly be done in a state of nature to resist the aggres- 
sions of wicked men. 

Some parts of Locke's natural law are surprising. For example, 
he says that captives in a just war are slaves by the law of nature. 
He says also that by nature every man has a right to punish 
attacks on himself or his property, even by death. He makes 
no qualification, so that if I catch a person engaged in petty 
pilfering I have, apparently, by the law of nature, a right to shoot 
him. 

Property is very prominent in Locke's political philosophy, and 
is, according to him, the chief reason for the institution of civil 
government: 

"The great and chief end of men uniting into commonwealths, 
and putting themselves under government, is the preservation of 
their property; to which in the state of nature there are many 
things wanting. 

The whole of this theory of the state of nature and natural law 
is in one sense clear but in another very puzzling. It is dear what 
Locke thought, but it is not clear how he can have thought it. 
Locke's ethic, as we saw, is utilitarian, but in his consideration of 
44 rights" he does not bring in utilitarian considerations. Sont*qjgg 
of this pervades the whole philosophy of law as taught by lawyers. 
Legal rights can be defined: broadly speaking, a man has a legal 
right when he can appeal to the taw to safeguard him against 
injury. A man has in general a legal right to his property, but if 
he has (say) an illicit store of cocaine, he has no legal remedy 
against a man who steals it* But the lawgiver has to decide what 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

without subordination or subjection; unless the lord and master 
of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one 
above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appoint- 
ment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty. 

"But though this [the state of nature] be a state of liberty, yet 
it is not a state of licence: though man in that state has an uncon- 
trollable liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has 
not liberty to destroy himself, or so much as any creature in his 
possession, but where some nobler use than its bare preservation 
calls for it. The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, 
which obliges every one; and reason, which is that law, teaches 
all mankind, who will but consult it, that being all equal and 
independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, 
liberty, or possessions" 1 (for we are all God's property). 2 

It presently appears, however, that, where most men are in the 
state of nature, there may nevertheless be some men who do not 
live according to the law of nature, and that the law of nature 
provides, up to a point, what may be done to resist such criminals. 
In a state of nature, we are told, every man can defend himself and 
what is his. " Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood 
be shed" is part of the law of nature. I may even kill a thief while 
he is engaged in stealing my property, and this right survives the 
institution of government, although, where there is government, 
if the thief gets away I must renounce private vengeance and 
resort to the law. 

The great objection to the state of nature is that, while it persists, 
every man is the judge in his own cause, since he must rely upon 
himself for the defence of his rights. For this evil, government is 
the remedy, but this is not a natural remedy. The state of nature, 
according to Locke, was evaded by a compact to create a govern- 
ment. Not any compact ends the state of nature, but only 
that of making one body politic. The various governments of 
independent States are now in a state of nature towards each 



The state of nature, we are told in a passage presumably directed 
against Hobbes, is not the same as a state of war, but more nearly 
its opposite. After explaining the right to kill a thief, on the ground 

1 Cf. the Declaration of Independence. 

"They are his property, whose workmanship they are, made to last 
during his, not another's pleasure." 

650 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

that the thief may be deemed to be making war upon me, Locke 
says: 

"And here we have the plain 'difference between the state of 
nature and the state of war/ which, however some men have con- 
founded, are as far distant, as a state of peace, goodwill, mutual 
assistance and preservation, and a state of enmity, malice, violence 
and mutual destruction are from one another." 

Perhaps the law of nature must be regarded as having a wider 
scope than the state of nature, since the former deals with thieves 
and murderers, while in the latter there are no such malefactors. 
This, at least, suggests a way out of an apparent inconsistency in 
Locke, consisting in his sometimes representing the state of nature 
as one where everyone is virtuous, and at other times discussing 
what may rightly be done in a state of nature to resist the aggres- 
sions of wicked men. 

Some parts of Locke's natural law are surprising. For example, 
he says that captives in a just war are slaves by the law of nature. 
He says also that by nature every man has a right to punish 
attacks on himself or his property, even by death. He makes 
no qualification, so that if I catch a person engaged in petty 
pilfering I have, apparently, by the law of nature, a right to shoot 
him. 

Property is very prominent in Locke's political philosophy, and 
is, according to him, the chief reason for the institution of civil 
government : 

"The great and chief end of men uniting into commonwealths, 
and putting themselves under government, is the preservation of 
their property; to which in the state of nature there are many 
things wanting/' 

The whole of this theory of the state of nature and natural law 
is in one sense clear but in another very puzzling. It is clear what 
Locke thought, but it is not clear how he can have thought it. 
Locke's ethic, as we saw, is utilitarian, but in his consideration of 
"rights" he does not bring in utilitarian considerations. SonJtAJgg 
of this pervades the whole philosophy of law as taught by lawyers. 
Legal rights can be defined: broadly speaking, a man has a legal 
right when he can appeal to the tow to safeguard him against 
injury. A man has in general a legal right to his property, but if 
he has (say) an illicit store of cocaine, he has no legal remedy 
against a man who steals it But the lawgiver has to decide what 

651 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

legal rights to create, and falls back naturally on the conception 
of "natural" rights, as those which the law should secure. 

I am attempting to go as far as is possible towards stating some- 
thing like Locke's theory in untheological terms. If it is assumed 
that ethics, and the classification of acts as "right" and "wrong/* 
is logically prior to actual law, it becomes possible to restate the 
theory in terms not involving mythical history. To arrive at the 
law of nature, we may put the question in this way: in the absence 
of law and government, what classes of acts by A against B justify 
B in retaliating against A, and what sort of retaliation is justified 
in different cases? It is generally held that no man can be blamed 
for defending himself against a murderous assault, even, if neces- 
sary, to the extent of killing the assailant. He may equally defend 
his wife and children, or, indeed, any member of the general public. 
In such cases, the existence of the law against murder becomes 
irrelevant, if, as may easily happen, the man assaulted would be 
dead before the aid of the police could be invoked; we have, 
therefore, to fall back on "natural" right. A man also has a right 
to defend his property, though opinions differ as to the amount 
of injury he may justly inflict upon a thief. 

In the relations between States, as Locke points out, "natural" 
law is relevant. In what circumstances is war justified ? So long 
as no international government exists, the answer to this question 
is purely ethical, not legal; it must be answered in the same way 
as it would be for an individual in a state of anarchy. 

Legal theory will be based upon the view that the "rights" of 
individuals should be protected by the State. That is to say, when 
a man suffers the kind of injury which would justify retaliation 
according to the principles of natural law, positive law should 
enact that the retaliation shall be done by the State. If you see a 
man making a murderous assault upon your brother, you have 
a right to kill him, if you cannot otherwise save your brother. In 
a state of natureso, at least, Locke holds if a man has succeeded 
iijJpSTing your brother, you have a right to kill him. But where law 
exists, you lose this right, which is taken over by the State. And 
if you kill in self-defence or in defence of another, you will have 
to prove to a law-court that this was the reason for the killing. 

We may then identify "natural law" with moral rules in so 
fir as they are independent of positive legal enactments. There 
must be such rules if there is to be any distinction between 

65* 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

good and bad laws. For Locke, the matter is simple, since 
moral rules have been laid down by God, and are to be found in 
the Bible. When this theological basis is removed, the matter 
becomes more difficult. But so long as it is held that there is an 
ethical distinction between right actions and wrong ones, we can 
say: Natural law decides what actions would be ethically right, and 
what wrong, in a community that had no government; and positive 
law ought to be, as far as possible, guided and inspired by natural 
law. 

In its absolute form, the doctrine that an individual has certain 
inalienable rights is incompatible with utilitarianism, i.e. with the 
doctrine that right acts are those that do most to promote the 
general happiness. But in order that a doctrine may be a suitable 
basis for law, it is not necessary that it should be true in every 
possible case, but only that it should be true in an overwhelming 
majority of cases. We can all imagine cases in which murder 
would be justifiable, but they are rare, and do not afford an argu- 
ment against the illegality of murder. Similarly it may be I am 
not saying that it is desirable, from a utilitarian point of view, 
to reserve to each individual a certain sphere of personal liberty. 
If so, the doctrine of the Rights of Man will be a suitable basis 
for the appropriate laws, even though these rights be subject to 
exceptions. A utilitarian will have to examine the doctrine, con- 
sidered as a basis for laws, from the point of view of its practical 
effects ; he cannot condemn it ab initio as contrary to his own ethic. 

C. THE SOCIAL CONTRACT 

In the political speculation of the seventeenth century, there 
were two main types of theory as to the origin of government. Of 
one type we have had an example in Sir Robert Filmer: this type 
maintained that God had bestowed power on certain persons, and 
that these persons, or their heirs, constituted the legitimate govern- 
ment, rebellion against which is not only treason, but itll^v. 
This view was sanctioned by sentiments of immemorial antiquity! 
in almost all early civilizations, the king is a sacred person. Kings, 
naturally, considered it an admirable theory. Aristocracies had 
motives for supporting it and motives for opposing it. In its favour 
was the fact that it emphasized the hereditary principle, and that 
it gave august support to resistance against the upstart merchant 

653 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

class. Where the middle class was more feared or hated by the 
aristocracy than the king was, these motives prevailed. Where the 
contrary was the case, and especially where the aristocracy had 
a chance of obtaining supreme power itself, it tended to oppose 
the king, and therefore to reject theories of divine right. 

The other main type of theory of which Locke is a fepresen- 
tative maintained that civil government is the result of a contract, 
and is an affair purely of this world, not something established by 
divine authority. Some writers regarded the social contract as a 
historical fact, others as a legal fiction; the important matter, for 
all of them, was to find a terrestrial origin for governmental 
authority. In fact, they could not think of any alternative to divine 
right except the supposed contract. It was felt by all except rebels 
that some reason must be found for obeying governments, and 
it was not thought sufficient to say that for most people the 
authority of government is convenient. Government must, in some 
sense, have a right to exact obedience, and the right conferred 
by a contract seemed the only alternative to a divine command. 
Consequently the doctrine that government was instituted by a 
contract was popular with practically all opponents of the divine 
right of kings. There is a hint of this theory in 'lliomas Aquinas, 
but the first serious development of it is to be found in Grotius. 

The contract doctrine was capable of taking forms which justified 
tyranny. Hobbes, for example, held that there was a contract 
among the citizens to hand over all power to the chosen sovereign, 
but the sovereign was not a part)' to the contract, and therefore 
necessarily acquired unlimited authority. This theory, at first, 
might have justified Cromwell's totalitarian State; after the Res- 
toration, it justified Charles II. In Locke's form of the doctrine, 
however, the government is a party to the contract, and can be 
justly resisted if it fails to fulfil its part of the bargain. Locke's 
doctrine is, in essence, more or less democratic, but the democratic 
element is limited by the view (implied rather than expressed) that 
thjfs' who have no property are not to be reckoned as citizens. 

Let us now see just what Locke has to say eft our present topic. 

There is first a definition of political power: 

"Political power I take to be the right of making laws, with 
penalty of death, and consequently aU less penalties for the regu- 
lating and preserving of property, and of employing the force of 
the community in the execution of such laws, and in the defence 

654 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

of the commonwealth from foreign injury, and all this only for 
the public good/' 

Government, we are told, is a remedy for the inconveniences 
that arise, in the state of nature, from the fact that, in that state, 
every man is the judge in his own cause. But where the monarch 
is a party to the dispute, this is no remedy, since the monarch is 
both judge and plaintiff. These considerations lead to the view 
that governments should not be absolute, and that the judiciary 
should be independent of the executive. Such arguments had an 
important future both in England and in America, but for the 
moment we are not concerned with them. 

By nature, Locke says, every man has the right to punish attacks 
on himself or his property, even by death. There is political society 
there, and there only, where men have surrendered this right to 
the community or to the law. 

Absolute monarchy is not a form of civil government, because 
there is no neutral authority to decide disputes between the 
monarch and a subject; in fact the monarch, in relation to his 
subjects, is still in a state of nature. It is useless to hope that being 
a king will make a naturally violent man virtuous. 

"He that would have been insolent and injurious in the woods 
of America would not probably be much better in a throne, where 
perhaps learning and religion shall be found out to justify all that 
he shall do to his subjects, and the sword presently silence all those 
that dare question it." 

Absolute monarchy is as if men protected themselves against 
pole-cats and foxes, "but are content, nay think it safety, to be 
devoured by lions." 

Civil society involves the rule of the majority, unless it is agreed 
that a greater number shall be required. (As, for example, in the 
United States, for a change in the Constitution or the ratification 
of a treaty.) This sounds democratic, but it must be remembered 
that Locke assumes the exclusion of women and the poor from 
the rights of citizenship. ^, 

"The beginning of politic society depends upon the conserSef 
the individuals to join into and make one society." It is argued 
somewhat half-heartedly that such consent must, at some time, 
have actually taken place, though it is admitted that the origin 
of government antedates history everywhere except among the 
Jews. 

655 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The civil compact which institutes government binds only those 
who made it; the son must consent afresh to a compact made by 
his father. (It is clear how this follows from Locke's principles, 
but it is not very realistic. A young American who, on attaining 
the age of twenty-one, announces "I refuse to be bound by the 
contract which inaugurated the United States" will find himself 
in difficulties.) 

The power of the government by contract, we are told, never 
extends beyond the common good. A moment ago I quoted a 
sentence as to the powers of government, ending "and all this 
only for the public good." It seems not to have occurred to Locke 
to ask who was to be the judge of the common good. Obviously, 
if the government is the judge it will always decide in its own 
favour. Presumably Locke would say that the majority of the 
citizens is to be the judge. But many questions have to be decided 
too quickly for it to be possible jto ascertain the opinion of the 
electorate; of these peace and war are perhaps the most important. 
The only remedy in such cases is to allow to public opinion or 
its representatives some power such as impeachment of sub- 
sequently punishing executive officers for acts that are found to 
have been unpopular. But often this is a very inadequate remedy. 

I quoted previously a sentence which I must now quote again: 

"The great and chief end of men uniting into commonwealths, 
and putting themselves under government, is the preservation 
of their property." 

Consistently with this doctrine Locke declares that: 

"The supreme power cannot take from any man any part of 
his property without his own consent." 

Still more surprising is the statement that, although military 
commanders have power of life and death over their soldiers, they 
have no power of taking money. (It follows that, in any army, it 
would be wrong to punish minor breaches of discipline by fines, 
but permissible to punish them by bodily injuty, such as flogging, 
s the absurd lengths to which Locke is driven by his 
ip of property.) 

The question of taxation might be supposed to raise difficulties 
for Locke, but he perceives npne. The expense of government, he 
says, must be borne by the citizens, but with their consent, i.e. 
with that of the majority. But why, one asks, should the consent 
of the majority suffice? Every man's consent, we were told, is 

656 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

necessary to justify the government in taking any part of his 
property. I suppose his tacit consent to taxation in accordance 
with majority decision is presumed to be involved in his citizen- 
ship, which, in turn, is presumed to be voluntary. All this is, of 
course, sometimes quite contrary to the facts. Most men have no* 
effective liberty of choice as to the State to which they shall 
belong, and none have liberty, nowadays, to belong to no State. 
Suppose, for example, you are a pacifist, and disapprove of war. 
Wherever you live, the government will take some of your pro- 
perty for warlike purposes. With what justice can you be com- 
pelled to submit to this? I can imagine many answers, but I do 
not think any of them are consistent with Locke's principles. 
He thrusts in the maxim of majority rule without adequate con- 
sideration, and offers no transition to it from his individualistic 
premisses, except the mythical social contract. 

The social contract, in the sepse required, is mythical even 
when, at some former period, there actually was a contract creating 
the government in question. The United States is a case in point. 
At the time when the Constitution was adopted, men had liberty 
of choice. Even then, many voted against it, and were therefore 
not parties to the contract. They could, of course, have left the 
country, and by remaining were deemed to have become bound 
by a contract to which they had not assented. But in practice it 
is usually difficult to leave one's country. And in the case of men 
born after the adoption of the Constitution their consent is even 
more shadowy. 

The question of the rights of the individual as against the 
government is a very difficult one. It is too readily assumed by 
democrats that, when the government represents the majority, it 
has a right to coerce the minority. Up to a point, this must be 
true, since coercion is of the essence of government. But the 
divine right of majorities, if pressed too far, may become almost 
as tyrannical as the divine right of kings. Locke says little on this 
subject in his Essays on Government, but considers it at some teHgt^ 
in his Utters on Toleration, where he argues that no believer in 
God should be penalized on account of his religious opinj 

The theory that government was qpated by 
course, pre-cvolutionary. Government, like i 
cough, must have grown up gradually, though, 
be introduced suddenly into new regions sudflfoAfc South Sea 

657 




WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Islands. Before men had studied anthropology they had no idea 
of the psychological mechanisms involved in the beginnings of 
government, or of the fantastic reasons which lead men to adopt 
institutions and customs that subsequently prove useful. But as a 
legal fiction, to justify government, the theory of the social contract 
has some measure of truth. 



D. PROPERTY 

From what has been said hitherto about Locke's views on 
property, it might seem as though he were the champion of the 
great capitalists against both their social superiors and their social 
inferiors, but this would be only a half-truth. One finds in him, 
side by side and unreconciled, doctrines which foreshadow those 
of developed capitalism and doctrines which adumbrate a more 
nearly socialistic outlook. It is easy to misrepresent him by one- 
sided quotations, on this topic as on most others. 

I will put down, in the order in which they occur, Locke's 
principal dicta on the subject of property. 

We are told first that every man has private property in the 
produce of his own labour or, at least, should have. In pre- 
industrial days this maxim was not so unrealistic as it has since 
become. Urban production was mainly by handicraftsmen who 
owned their tools and sold their produce. As for agricultural pro- 
duction, it was held by the school to which Locke belonged that 
peasant proprietorship would be the best system. He states that 
a man may own as much land as he can till, but not more. Me 
seems blandly unaware that, in all the countries of Europe, the 
realization of this programme would be hardly possible without 
a bloody revolution. Everywhere the bulk of agricultural land 
belonged to aristocrats, who exacted from the farmers either a 
fixed proportion of the produce (often a half), or a rent which 
could be varied from time to time. The former system prevailed 
j^ffance and Italy, the latter in England. Farther East, in Russia 
and Prussia, the workers were serfs, who worked for the land* 
owner and had virtually no rights. The old system was ended in 
France by the Frcpch Revolution, in northern Italy and western 
Germany by the conquests of the French revolutionary armies. 
Serfdom was abolished in Prussia as a result of defeat by Napoleon, 
and in Russia as a result of defeat in the Crimean War. But in 

658 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

both countries the aristocrats retained their landed estates. In 
East Prussia, this system, though drastically controlled by the 
Nazis, survived till the present day; in Russia and what are 
now Lithuania, Latvia, and Esthonia, the aristocrats were dis- 
possessed by the Russian Revolution. In Hungary and Poland 
they survived ; in Eastern Poland they were "liquidated" by the 
Soviet Government in 1940. The Soviet Government, however, 
has done everything in its power to substitute collective fanning 
rather than peasant proprietorship throughout Russia. 

In England the development has been more complex. In Locke's 
day, the position of the rural labourer was mitigated by the 
existence of commons, on which he had important rights, which 
enabled him to raise a considerable part of his food himself. 
This system was a survival from the Middle Ages, and was 
viewed with disapproval by modern-minded men, who pointed 
out that from the point of view of production it was wasteful. 
Accordingly, there was a movement for enclosure of commons, 
which began under Henry VIII and continued under Cromwell, 
but did not become strong until about 1750. From that time 
onward, for about ninety years, one common after another was 
enclosed and handed over to the local landowners. Each enclosure 
required an Act of Parliament, and the aristocrats who controlled 
both Houses of Parliament ruthlessly used their legislative power 
to enrich themselves, while thrusting agricultural labourers down 
to the verge of starvation. Gradually, owing to the growth of 
industry, the position of agricultural labourers improved, since 
otherwise they could not be prevented from migrating to the 
towns. At present, as a result of the taxation introduced by Lloyd 
George, the aristocrats have been compelled to part with most of 
their rural property. But those who also own urban or industrial 
property have been able to hang on to their estates. There has 
been no sudden revolution, but a gradual transition which is 
still in progress. At present, those aristocrats who are still rich 
owe their wealth to urban or industrial property. 

This long development may be regarded, except in Russia, as 
in accordance with Locke's principles. The odd thing is that he 
could announce doctrines requiring 90 much revolution before 
they could be put into effect, and yet show no sign that he thought 
the system existing in his day unjust, or that he was aware of its 
being different from the system that be advocated. 

659 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The labour theory of value i.e. the doctrine that the value of 
a product depends upon the labour expended upon it which 
some attribute to Karl Marx and others to Ricardo, is to be found 
in Locke, and was suggested to him by a line of predecessors 
stretching back to Aquinas. As Tawney says, summarizing 
scholastic doctrine: 

"The essence of the argument was that payment may properly 
be demanded by the craftsmen who make the goods, or by the 
merchants who transport them, for both labour in their vocation 
and serve the common need. The unpardonable sin is that of the 
speculator or middleman, who snatches private gain by the 
exploitation of public necessities. The true descendant of the 
doctrines of Aquinas is the labour theory of value. The last of the 
schoolmen was Karl Marx/' 

The labour theory of value has two aspects, one ethical, the 
other economic. That is to say, it may assert that the value of a 
product ought to be proportional to the labour expended on it, or 
that in fact the labour regulates the price. The latter doctrine is 
only approximately true, as Locke recognizes. Nine tenths of 
value, he says, is due to labour; but as to the other tenth he says 
nothing. It is labour, he says, that puts the difference of value on 
everything. He instances land in America occupied by Indians, 
which has almost no value because the Indians do not cultivate 
it. He does not seem to realize that land may acquire value as soon 
as people are willing to work on it, and before they have actually 
done so. If you own a piece of desert land on which somebody 
else finds oil, you can sell it for a good price without doing any 
work on it. As was natural in his day, he does not think of such 
cases, but only of agriculture. Peasant proprietorship, which he 
favours, is inapplicable to such things as large-scale mining, 
which require expensive apparatus and many workers. 

The principle that a man has a right to the produce of his own 
labour is useless in an industrial civilization. Suppose you are 
gptfrioyed in one operation in the manufacture of Ford cars, how 
is anyone to estimate what proportion of the total output is due 
to your labour? Or suppose you are employed by a railway com- 
pany in the transport of goods, who can decide what share you 
shall be deemed to have in the production of the goods? Such 
considerations have led those who wish to prevent the exploitation 
of labour to abandon the principle of the right to your own produce 

660 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

in favour of more socialistic methods of organizing production and 
distribution. 

The labour theory of value has usually been advocated from 
hostility to some class regarded as predatory. The Schoolmen, in 
so far as they held it, did so from opposition to usurers, who 
were mostly Jews. Ricardo held it in opposition to landowners, 
Marx to capitalists. But Locke seems to have held it in a vacuum 
without hostility to any class. His only hostility is to monarchs, 
but this is unconnected with his views on value. 

Some of Locke's opinions are so odd that I cannot see how to 
make them sound sensible. He says that a man must not have so 
many plums that they are bound to go bad before he and his family 
can eat them ; but he may have as much gold and as many diamonds 
as he can lawfully get, because gold and diamonds do not go bad. 
It does not occur to him that the man who has the plums might 
sell them before they go bad. 

He makes a great deal of the imperishable character of the 
precious metals, which, he says, are the source of money and 
inequality of fortune. He seems, in an abstract and academic way, 
to regret economic inequality, but he certainly does not think 
that it would be wise to take such measures as might prevent it. 
No doubt he was impressed, as all the men of his time were, by 
the gains to civilization that were due to rich men, chiefly as 
patrons of art and letters. The same attitude exists in modern 
America, where science and art are largely dependent upon the 
benefactions of the very rich. To some extent, civilization is 
furthered by social injustice. This fact is the basis of what is 
most respectable in conservatism. 

E. CHECKS AND BALANCES 

The doctrine that the legislative, executive, and judicial func- 
tions of government should be kept separate is characteristic of 
liberalism; it arose in England in the course of resistance tfrtfce 
Stuarts, and is clearly formulated by Locke, at least as regards 
the legislature and the executive. The legislative and executive 
must be separate, he says, to prevent abuse of power. It must, of 
course, be understood that when he speaks of the legislature he 
means Parliament, and when he speaks of the executive he means 
the king; at least this is what he means emotionally, whatever he 

661 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

may logically intend to mean. Accordingly he thinks of 
the legislature as virtuous, while the executive is usually 
wicked. 

The legislative, he says, must be supreme, except that it must 
be removable by the community. It is implied that, like the 
English House of Commons, the legislative is to be elected from 
time to time by popular vote. The condition that the legislative 
is to be removable by the people, if taken seriously, condemns the 
pan allowed by the British Constitution in Locke's day to King 
and Lords as part of the legislative power. 

In all well-framed governments, Locke says, the legislative and 
executive are separate. The question therefore arises: what is to 
be done when they conflict ? If the executive fails to summon the 
legislative at the proper times, we are told, the executive is at 
war with the people, and may be removed by force. This is 
obviously a view suggested by what happened under Charles I. 
From 1628 to 1640 he tried to govern without Parliament; this 
sort of thing, Locke feels, must be prevented, by civil war if 
necessary. 

"Force," he says, "is to be opposed to nothing but unjust and 
unlawful force." This principle is useless in practice unless there 
exists some body with the legal right to pronounce when force is 
"unjust and unlawful." Charles I's attempt to collect ship-money 
without the consent of Parliament was declared by his opponents 
to be "unjust and unlawful," and by him to be just and lawful. 
Only the military issue of the Civil War proved that his inter- 
pretation of the Constitution was the wrong one. The same thing 
happened in the American Civil War. Had States the right to 
secede? No one knew, and only the victory of the North decided 
the legal question. The belief, which one finds in Ixickc and in 
most writers of his time, that any honest man can know what is 
just and lawful, is one that does not allow for the strength of party 
bias on both sides, or for the difficulty of establishing a tribunal, 
u4iAher outwardly or in men's consciences, that shall be capable 
of pronouncing authoritatively on vexed questions. In practice, 
such questions, if sufficiently important, are decided simply by 
power, not by justice and law. 

To some degree, though in veiled language, Locke recognizes 
this fact In a dispute between legislative and executive, he says 
there is, in certain cases, no judge under Heaven. Since Heaven 

662 



LOCKE'S POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

does not make explicit pronouncements, this means, in effect, 
that a decision can only be reached by fighting, since it is assumed 
that Heaven will give the victory to the better cause. Some 
such view is essential to any doctrine that divides governmental 
power. Where such a doctrine is embodied in the Constitu- 
tion, the only way to avoid occasional civil war is to practise 
compromise and common sense. But compromise and common 
sense are habits of mind, and cannot be embodied in a written 
constitution. 

It is surprising that Locke says nothing about the judiciary, 
although this was a burning question in his day. Until the Revo- 
lution, judges could at any moment be dismissed by the king; 
consequently they condemned his enemies and acquitted his 
friends. After the Revolution, they were made irremovable except 
by an Address from both Houses of Parliament. It was thought 
that this would cause their decisions to be guided by the law; in 
fact, in cases involving party spirit, it has merely substituted 
the judge's prejudice for the king's. However that may be, wher- 
ever the principle of checks and balances prevailed the judiciary 
became a third independent branch of government alongside of 
the legislative and executive. The most noteworthy example is 
the United States' Supreme Court. 

The history of the doctrine of checks and balances has been 
interesting. 

In England, the country of its origin, it was intended to limit 
the power of the king, who, until the Revolution, had complete 
control of the executive. Gradually, however, the executive became 
dependent upon Parliament, since it was impossible for a ministry 
to carry on without a majority in the House of Commons. The 
executive thus became, in effect, a committee chosen in fact, 
though not in form, by Parliament, with the result that legislative 
and executive powers became gradually less and less separate. 
During the last fifty years or so, a further development took place, 
owing to the Prime Minister's power of dissolution and tt the 
increasing strictness of party discipline. The majority in Parlia- 
ment now decides which party shall be in power, but, having 
decided that, it cannot in practice decide anything else. Proposed 
legislation is hardly ever enacted unless introduced by govern- 
ment. Thus the government is both legislative and executive, 
and its power is only limited by the need of occasional general 

663 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

elections. This system is, of course, totally contrary to Locke's 
principles. 

In France, where the doctrine was preached with great force 
by Montesquieu, it was held by the more moderate parties in the 
French Revolution, but was swept into temporary oblivion by the 
victory of the Jacobins. Napoleon naturally had no use for it, but 
it was revived at the Restoration, to disappear again with the rise 
of Napoleon III. It was again revived in 1871, and led to the 
adoption of a constitution in which the President had very little 
power and the government could not dissolve the Chambers. 
The result was to give great power to the Chamber of Deputies, 
both as against the government and as against the electorate. 
There was more division of powers than in modern England, but 
less than there should be on Locke's principles, since the legis- 
lature overshadowed the executive. What the French Constitution 
will be after the present war it is impossible to foresee. 

The country where Locke's principle of the division of powers 
has found its fullest application is the United States, where the 
President and Congress are wholly independent of each other, 
and the Supreme Court is independent of both. Inadvertently, the 
Constitution made the Supreme Court a branch of the legislature, 
since nothing is a law if the Supreme Court says it is not. The 
fact that its powers are nominally only interpretative in reality 
increases those powers, since it makes it difficult to criticize what 
are supposed to be purely legal decisions. It says a very great 
deal for the political sagacity of Americans that this Constitution 
has only once led to armed conflict. 

Locke's political philosophy was, on the whole, adequate and 
useful until the industrial revolution. Since then, it has been 
increasingly unable to tackle the important problems. The power 
of property, as embodied in vast corporations, grew beyond any- 
thing imagined by Locke. The necessary functions of the State 
for example, in education increased enormously. Nationalism 
bjoufent about an alliance, sometimes an amalgamation, of econo- 
mic and political power, making war the principal means of 
competition. The single separate citizen has no longer the power 
and independence that he had in Locke's speculations. Our age 
is one of organization, and its conflicts are between organizations, 
not between separate individuals. The state of nature, as Locke 
says, still exists as between States. A new international Social 

664 



LOCKERS POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 

Contract is necessary before we can enjoy the promised benefits 
of government. When once an international government has been 
created, much of Locke's political philosophy will again become 
applicable, though not the part of it that deals with private 
property. 



66 ^ 



Chapter XV 
LOCKE'S INFLUENCE 

FROM the time of Locke down to the present day, there have 
been in Europe two main types of philosophy, and one of 
these owes both its doctrines and its method to Locke, while 
the other was derived first from Descartes and then from Kant. 
Kant himself thought that he had made a synthesis of the philo- 
sophy derived from Descartes and that derived from Locke ; but 
this cannot be admitted, at least from a historical point of view, 
for the followers of Kant were in the Cartesian, not the Lockean, 
tradition. The heirs of Locke are, first, Berkeley and Hume ; second, 
those of the French philosophes who did not belong to the school 
of Rousseau; third, Bentham and the philosophical Radicals; 
fourth, with important accretions from Continental philosophy, 
Marx and his disciples. But Marx's system is eclectic, and any 
simple statement about it is almost sure to be false ; I will, therefore, 
leave him on one side until I come to consider him in detail. 

In Locke's own day, his chief philosophical opponents were the 
Cartesians and Leibniz. Quite illogically, the victory of Locke's 
philosophy in England and France was largely due to the prestige 
of Newton. Descartes' authority as a philosopher was enhanced, 
in his own day, by his work in mathematics and natural philo- 
sophy. But his doctrine of vortices was definitely inferior to 
Newton's law of gravitation as an explanation of the solar system. 
The victory of the Newtonian cosmogony diminished men's 
respect for Descartes and increased their respect for England. 
Both these causes inclined men favourably towards Locke. In 
eighteenth-century France, where the intellectuals were in 
rebellion against an antiquated, corrupt, and effete despotism, 
they regarded England as the home of freedom, and were pre- 
disposed in favour of Locke's philosophy by his political doctrines. 
In the last times before the Revolution, Locke's influence in 
France was reinforced bgr that of Hume, who lived for a time in 
France and was personally-acquainted with many of the leading 
tavants. 

The diief transmitter of English influence to France was 
Voltaire. 

666 



LOCKE'S INFLUENCE 

In England, the philosophical followers of Locke until the 
French Revolution, took no interest in his political doctrines. 
Berkeley was a bishop not much interested in politics; Hume was 
a Tory who followed the lead of Bolingbroke. England was 
politically quiescent in their time, and a philosopher could be 
content to theorize without troubling himself about the state of 
the world. The French Revolution changed this, and forced the 
best minds into opposition to the status quo. Nevertheless, the 
tradition in pare philosophy remained unbroken. Shelley's 
Necessity of Atheism, for which he was expelled from Oxford, is 
full of Locke's influence. 1 

Until the publication of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, 
it might have seemed as if the older philosophical tradition of 
Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz were being definitely overcome 
by the newer empirical method. This newer method, however, 
had never prevailed in German universities, and after 1792 it was 
held responsible for the horrors of the Revolution. Recanting 
revolutionaries such as Coleridge found in Kant an intellectual 
support for their opposition to French atheism. The Germans, in 
their resistance to the French, were glad to have a German 
philosophy to uphold them. Even the French, after the fall of 
Napoleon, were glad of any weapon against Jacobinism. All these 
factors favoured Kant. 

Kant, like Darwin, gave rise to a movement which he would 
have detested. Kant was a liberal, a democrat, a pacifist, but those 
who professed to develop his philosophy were none of these things. 
Or, if they still called themselves Liberals, they were Liberals of 
a new species. Since Rousseau and Kant, there have been two 
schools of liberalism, which may be distinguished as the hard- 
headed and the soft-hearted. The hard-headed developed, through 
Bent ham, Ricardo, and Marx, by logical stages into Stalin; the 
soft-hearted, by other logical stages, through Fichte, Byron, 
Carlylc, and Nietzsche, into Hitler. This statement, of course, is 
too schcmat c to be quite true, but it may serve as a map*and a 
mnemonic. The stages in the evolution of ideas have had almost 
the quality of the Hegelian dialectic: doctrines have developed, 
by steps that each seem natural, into their opposites. But the 

1 Take, e.g., Shelley's dictum; "When a proposition is offered to the 
mind, it perceives the agreement or disagreement of the ideas of which 
it is composed." 

667 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

developments have not been due solely to the inherent movement 
of ideas; they have been governed, throughout, by external cir- 
cumstances and the reflection of these circumstances in human 
emotions. That this is the case may be made evident by one 
outstanding fact: that the ideas of liberalism have undergone no 
part of this development in America, where they remain to this 
day as in Locke. 

Leaving politics on one side, let us examine the differences 
between the two schools of philosophy, which may be broadly 
distinguished as the Continental and the British respectively. 

There is first of all a difference of method. British philosophy is 
more detailed and piecemeal than that of the Continent ; when it 
allows itself some general principle, it sets to work to prove it 
inductively by examining its various applications. Thus Hume, 
after announcing that there is no idea without an antecedent im- 
pression, immediately proceeds to consider the following objec- 
tion: suppose you are seeing two shades of colour which are 
similar but not identical, and suppose you have never seen a shade 
of colour intermediate between the two, can you, nevertheless, 
imagine such a shade? He does not decide the question, and 
considers that a decision adverse to his general principle would 
not be fatal to him, because his principle is not logical but 
empirical. When to take a contrast Leibniz wants to establish 
his monadology, he argues, roughly, as follows: Whatever is 
complex must be composed of simple parts ; what is simple cannot 
be extended; therefore everything is composed of parts having 
no extension. But what is not extended is not matter. Therefore 
the ultimate constituents of things are not material, and, if not 
material, then mental. Consequently a table is really a colony of 
souls. 

The difference of method, here, may be characterized as follows: 
In Locke or Hume, a comparatively modest conclusion is drawn 
from a broad survey of many facts, whereas in Leibniz a vast 
edifice of deduction is pyramided upon a pin-point of logical 
principle. In Leibniz, if the principle is completely true and the 
deductions are entirely valid, all is well; but the structure is 
unstable, and the slightest flaw anywhere brings it down in ruins. 
In Locke or Hume, on the contrary, the base of the pyramid is 
on the solid ground of observed fact, and the pyramid tapers 
upward, not downward; consequently the equilibrium is stable, 

668 



LOCKE'S INFLUENCE 

and a flaw here or there can be rectified without total disaster. 
This difference of method survived Kant's attempt to incorporate 
something of the empirical philosophy: from Descartes to Hegel 
on the one side, and from Locke to John Stuart Mill on the other, 
it remains unvarying. 

The difference in method is connected with various other 
differences. Let us take first metaphysics. 

Descartes offered metaphysical proofs of the existence of God, 
of which the most important had been invented in the eleventh 
century by St. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury. Spinoza had 
a pantheistic God, who seemed to the orthodox to be no God at 
all; however that may be, Spinoza's arguments were essentially 
metaphysical, and are traceable (though he may not have realized 
this) to the doctrine that every proposition must have a subject 
and a predicate. Leibniz's metaphysics had the same source. 

In Locke, the philosophical direction that he inaugurated is 
not yet fully developed; he accepts as valid Descartes' arguments 
as to the existence of God. Berkeley invented a wholly new argu- 
ment; but Hume in whom the new philosophy comes to com- 
pletion rejected metaphysics entirely, and held that nothing can 
be discovered by reasoning on the subjects with which metaphysics 
is concerned. This view persisted in the empirical school, while 
the opposite view, somewhat modified, persisted in Kant and his 
disciples. 

In ethics, there is a similar division between the two schools. 

Locke, as we saw, believed pleasure to be the good, and this was 
the prevalent view among empiricists throughout the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries. Their opponents, on the contrary, 
despised pleasure as ignoble, and had various systems of ethics 
which seemed more exalted. Hobbes valued power, and Spinoza, 
up to a point, agreed until Hobbes. There are in Spinoza two 
unreconciled views on ethics, one that of Hobbes, the other that 
the good consists in mystic union with God. Leibniz made no 
important contribution to ethics, but Kant made ethics supreme, 
and derived his metaphysics from ethical premisses. Kant's ethic 
is important, because it is anti-utilitarian, a priori, and what is 
called "noble/ 1 

Kant says that if you are kind to your brother because you are 
fond of him, you have no moral merit: an act only has moral merit 
when it is performed because the moral law enjoins it. Although 

669 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

pleasure is not the good, it is nevertheless unjust so Kant 
maintains that the virtuous should suffer. Since this often 
happens in this world, there must be another world where they 
are rewarded after death, and there must be a God to secure 
justice in the life hereafter. He rejects all the old metaphysical 
arguments for God and immortality, but considers his new ethical 
argument irrefutable. 

Kant himself was a man whose outlook on practical affairs was 
kindly and humanitarian, but the same cannot be said of most of 
those who rejected happiness as the good. The sort of ethic that 
is called "noble" is less associated with attempts to improve the 
world than is the more mundane view that we should seek to 
make men happier. This is not surprising. Contempt for happiness 
is easier when the happiness is other people's than when it is our 
own. Usually the substitute for happiness is some form of heroism. 
This affords unconscious outlets for the impulse to power, and 
abundant excuses for cruelty. Or, again, what is valued may be 
strong emotion; this was the case with the romantics. This led 
to a toleration of such passions as hatred and revenge; Byron's 
heroes are typical, and are never persons of exemplary behaviour. 
The men who did most to promote human happiness were as 
might have been expected those who thought happiness im- 
portant, not those who despised it in comparison with something 
more "sublime." Moreover, a man's ethic usually reflects his 
character, and benevolence leads to a desire for the general 
happiness. Thus the men who thought happiness the end of life 
tended to be the more benevolent, while those who proposed 
other ends were often dominated, unconsciously, by cruelty or 
love of power. 

These ethical differences are associated, usually though not 
invariably, with differences in politics. Locke, as we saw, is 
tentative in his beliefs, not at all authoritarian, and willing to 
leave every question to be decided by free discussion. The result, 
both'm his case and in that of his followers, was a belief in reform, 
but of a gradual sort. Since their systems of thought were piece- 
meal, and the result of separate investigations of many different 
questions, their political vi* ws tended naturally to have the same 
character. They fought shy of large programmes all cut out of 
one block, and preferred to consider each question on its merits. 
In politics, as in philosophy, they were tentative and experi- 

670 



LOCKE'S INFLUENCE 

mental. Their opponents, on the other hand, who thought they 
could "grasp this sorry scheme of things entire/' were much 
more willing to "shatter it to bits and then remould it nearer to 
the heart's desire." They might do this as revolutionaries, or as 
men who wished to increase the authority of the powers that be; 
in either case, they did not shrink from violence in pursuit of 
vast objectives, and they condemned love of peace as ignoble. 

The great political defect of Locke and his disciples, from a 
modern point of view, was their worship of property. But those 
who criticized them on this account often did so in the interest of 
classes that were more harmful than the capitalists, such as 
monarchs, aristocrats, and militarists. The aristocratic landowner, 
whose income comes to him without effort and in accordance 
with immemorial custom, does not think of himself as a money 
grubber, and is not so thought of by men who do not look below 
the picturesque surface. The business man, on the contrary, is 
engaged in the conscious pursuit of wealth, and while his activities 
were more or less novel they roused a resentment not felt towards 
the gentlemanly exactions of the landowner. That is to say, this 
was the case with middle-class writers and those who read them; 
it was not the case with the peasants, as appeared in the French 
and Russian Revolutions. But peasants are inarticulate. 

Most of the opponents of Locke's school had an admiration for 
war, as being heroic and involving a contempt for comfort and ease. 
Those who adopted a utilitarian ethic, on the contrary, tended to 
regard most wars as folly. This, again, at least in the nineteenth 
century, brought them into alliance with the capitalists, who 
disliked wars because they interfered with trade. The capitalists' 
motive was, of course, pure self-interest, but it led to views more 
consonant with the general interest than those of militarists and 
their literary supporters. The attitude of capitalists to war, it is 
true, has fluctuated. England's wars of the eighteenth century, 
except the American war, were on the whole profitable, and were 
supported by business men ; but throughout the nineteenth century 
until its last years, they favoured peace. In modern times, big 
business, everywhere, has come into such intimate relations with 
the national State that the situation i greatly changed. But even 
now, both in England and in America, big business an the whole 
dislikes war. 

Enlightened self-interest is, of course, not the loftiest of motives, 

671 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

but those who decry it often substitute, by accident or design, 
motives which are much worse, such as hatred, envy, and love 
of power. On the whole, the school which owed its origin to 
Locke, and which preached enlightened self-interest, did more to 
increase human happiness, and less to increase human misery, 
than was done by the schools which despised it in the name of 
heroism and self-sacrifice. I do not forget the horrors of early 
industrialism, but these, after all, were mitigated within the 
system. And I set against them Russian sertdom, the evils of war 
and its aftermath of fear and hatred, and the inevitable obscu- 
rantism of those who attempt to preserve ancient systems when 
they have lost their vitality. 



672 



Chapter XVI 
BERKELEY 

GEORGE BERKELEY (1685-1753) is important in philo- 
sophy through his denial of the existence of matter a 
denial which he supported by a number of ingenious argu- 
ments. He maintained that material objects only exist through 
being perceived. To the objection that, in that case, a tree, for 
instance, would cease to exist if no one was looking at it, he 
replied that God always perceives everything; if there were no 
God, what we take to be material objects would have a jerky life, 
suddenly leaping into being when we look at them; but as it is, 
owing to God's perceptions, trees and rocks and stones have an 
existence as continuous as common sense supposes. This is, in 
his opinion, a weighty argument for the existence of God. A 
limerick by Ronald Knox, with a reply, sets forth Berkeley's 
theory of material objects: 

There was a young man who said, "God 
Must think it exceedingly odd 

If he finds that this tree 

Continues to be 
When there's no one about in the Quad." 

REPLY 

Dear Sir: 

Your astonishment's odd: 
/ am always about in the Quad. 
And that's why the tree 
Will continue to be, 
Since observed by 

Yours faithfully \ 

GOD. 

Berkeley was an Irishman, and became a Fellow of Trinity 
College, Dublin, at the age of twenty-two. He was presented at 
court by Swift, and Swift's Vanessa left him half her property. 
He formed a scheme for a college in the Bermudas, with a view 
to which he went to America; but after spending three years 

Hut tffy of I*'***** rkUwpky 673 V* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

(1728-31) in Rhode Island, he came home and relinquished the 
project. He was the author of the well-known line: 

Westward the course of empire takes its way, 

on account of which the town of Berkeley in California was called 
after him. In 1734 he became Bishop of Cloyne. In later life he 
abandoned philosophy for tar-water, to which he attributed mar- 
vellous medicinal properties. It was concerning tar-water that he 
wrote: "These are the cups that cheer, but do not inebriate" 
a sentiment more familiar as subsequently applied by Cowper 
to tea. 

All his best work was done while he was still quite young: A 
New Theory of Vision in 1709, The Principles of Human Knowledge 
in 1710, The Dialogues of Hylas and Philonous in 1713. His writings 
after the age of twenty-eight were of less importance. He is a 
very attractive writer, with a charming style. 

His argument against matter is most persuasively set forth in 
The Dialogues of Hylas and Philonous. Of these dialogues I propose 
to consider only the first and the very beginning of the second, 
since everything that is said after that seems to me of minor im- 
portance. In the portion of the work that I shall consider, Berkeley 
advances valid arguments in favour of a certain important con- 
clusion, though not quite in favour of the conclusion that he 
thinks he is proving. He thinks he is proving that all reality is 
mental; what he is proving is that we perceive qualities, not 
things, and that qualities are relative to the percipient. 

I shall begin with an uncritical account of what seems to me 
important in the Dialogues; I shall then embark upon criticism; 
and finally I shall state the problems concerned as they appear 
tome. 

The characters in the Dialogues are two: Hylas, who stands for 
scientifically educated common sense; and Philonous, who is 
Berkeley. 

After a few amiable remarks, Hylas says that he has heard 
strange reports of the opinions of Philonous, to the effect that he 
does not believe in material substance. "Can anything," he 
exclaims, "be more fantastical, more repugnant to Common Sense, 
or a more manifest piece of Scepticism, than to believe there is 
no such thing as matter ?" Philonous replies that he does not 
deny the reality of sensible things, i.e. of what is perceived imme- 

674 



BERKELEY 

diately by the senses, but that we do not see the causes of colours 
or hear the causes of sounds. Both agree that the senses make 
no inferences. Philonous points out that by sight we perceive 
only light, colour, and figure; by hearing, only sounds; and so 
on. Consequently, apart from sensible qualities there is nothing 
sensible, and sensible things are nothing but sensible qualities 
or combinations of sensible qualities. 

Philonous now sets to work to prove that "the reality of sensible 
things consists in being perceived, 9 ' as against the opinion of Hylas, 
that "to exist is one thing, and to be perceived is another.' 9 That 
sense-data are mental is a thesis which Philonous supports by a 
detailed examination of the various senses. He begins with heat 
and cold. Great heat, he says, is a pain, and must be in a mind. 
Therefore heat is mental ; and a similar argument applies to cold. 
This is reinforced by the famous argument about the lukewarm 
water. When one of your hands is hot and the other cold, you put 
both into lukewarm water, which feels cold to one hand and hot 
to the other; but the water cannot be at once hot and cold. This 
finishes Hylas, who acknowledges that "heat and cold are only 
sensations existing in our minds." But he points out hopefully 
that other sensible qualities remain. 

Philonous next takes up tastes. He points out that a sweet taste 
is a pleasure and a bitter taste is a pain, and that pleasure and pain 
are mental. The same argument applies to odours, since they are 
pleasant or unpleasant. 

Hylas makes a vigorous effort to rescue sound, which, he says, 
is motion in air, as may be seen from the fact that there are no 
sounds in a vacuum. We must, he says, "distinguish between 
sound as it is perceived by us, and as it is in itself; or between the 
sound which we immediately perceive and that which exists 
without us." Philonous points out that what Hylas calls "real" 
sound, being a movement, might possibly be seen or felt, but can 
certainly not be heard; therefore it is not sound as we know it 
in perception. As to this, Hylas now concedes that "souncls too 
have no real being without the mind." 

They now come to colours, and here Hylas begins confidently: 
"Pardon me: the case of colours is yery different. Can anything 
be plainer than that we see them on the objects?" Substances 
existing without the mind, he maintains, have the colours we see 
on them. But Philonous has no difficulty in disposing of this view. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

He begins with the sunset clouds, which are red and golden, and 
points out that a cloud, when you are close to it, has no such 
colours. He goes on to the difference made by a microscope, and 
to the yellowness of everything to a man who has jaundice. And 
very small insects, he says, must be able to see much smaller 
objects than we can see. Hylas thereupon says that colour is not 
in the objects, but in the light ; it is, he says, a thin fluid substance. 
Philonous points out, as in the case of sound, that, according to 
Hylas, "real" colours are something different from the red and 
blue that we see, and that this won't do. 

Hereupon Hylas gives way about all secondary qualities, but 
continues to say that primary qualities, notably figure and motion, 
are inherent in external unthinking substances. To this Philonous 
replies that things look big when we are near them and small 
when we are far off, and that a movement may seem quick to one 
man and slow to another. 

At this point Hylas attempts a new departure. He made a 
mistake, he says, in not distinguishing the object from the sensation ; 
the act of perceiving he admits to be mental, but not what is 
perceived; colours, for example, "have a real existence without 
the mind, in some unthinking substance." To this Philonous 
replies: "That any immediate object of the senses that is, any 
idea or combination of ideas should exist in an unthinking sub- 
stance, or exterior to J// minds, is in itself an evident contradiction." 
It will be observed that, at this point, the argument becomes 
logical and is no longer empirical. A few pages later, Phiionous 
says: "Whatever is immediately perceived is an idea; and can 
any idea exist out of the mind ?" 

After a metaphysical discussion of substance, Hylas returns to 

the discussion of visual sensations, with the argument that he 

sees things at a distance. To this Philonous replies that this is 

equally true of things seen in dreams, which everyone admits to 

be mental; further, that distance is not perceived by sight, but 

Judged as the result of experience, and that, to a man born blind 

"but now for the first time able to see, visual objects would not 

appear distant. 

At the beginning of theasecond Dialogue, Hylas urges that 
certain traces in the brain are the causes of sensations, but Philo- 
nous retorts that "the brain, being a sensible thing, exists only 
in the mind." 

676 



BERKELEY 

The remainder of the Dialogues is less interesting, and need 
not be considered. 

Let us now make a critical analysis of Berkeley's contentions. 

Berkeley's argument consists of two parts. On the one hand, he 
argues that we do not perceive material things, but only colours, 
sounds, etc., and that these are "mental" or "in the mind." His 
reasoning is completely cogent as to the first point, but as to the 
second it suffers from the absence of any definition of the word 
"mental." He relies, in fact, upon the received view that every- 
thing must be either material or mental, and that nothing is both. 

When he says that we perceive qualities, not "things" or 
"material substances," and that there is no reason to suppose 
that the different qualities which common sense regards as all 
belonging to one "thing" inhere in a substance distinct from each 
and all of them, his reasoning may be accepted. But when he goes 
on to say that sensible qualities including primary qualities 
are "mental," the arguments are of very different kinds, and of 
very different degrees of validity. There are some attempting to 
prove logical necessity, while others are more empirical. Let us 
take the former first. 

Philonous says: "Whatever is immediately perceived is an idea: 
and can any idea exist out of the mind ?" This would require a long 
discussion of the word "idea." If it were held that thought and 
perception consist of a relation between subject and object, it 
would be possible to identify the mind with the subject, and to 
maintain that there is nothing "in" the mind, but only objects 
"before" it. Berkeley discusses the view that we must distinguish 
the act of perceiving from the object perceived, and that the former 
is mental while the latter is not. His argument against this view is 
obscure, and necessarily so, since, for one who believes in mental 
substance, as Berkeley does, there is no valid means of refuting it. 
He says: "That any immediate object of the senses should exist 
in an unthinking substance, or exterior to all minds, is ip itself 
an evident contradiction." There is here a fallacy, analogous to, 
the following: "It is impossible for a nephew to exist without an 
uncle; now Mr. A is a nephew; therefore it is logically necessary 
for Mr. A to have an uncle." It is, *>f course, logically necessary 
given that Mr. A is a nephew, but not from anything to be dis- 
covered by analysis of Mr. A. So, if something is an object of the 
senses, some mind is concerned with it; but it does not follow 

67? 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

that the same thing could not have existed without being an 
object of the senses. 

There is a somewhat analogous fallacy as regards what is con- 
ceived Hylas maintains that he can conceive a house which no 
one perceives, and which is not in any mind. Philonous retorts 
that whatever Hylas conceives is in his mind, so that the supposed 
house is, after all, mental. Hylas should have answered: "I do 
not mean that I have in mind the image of a house ; when I say 
that I can conceive a house which no one perceives, what I really 
mean is that I can understand the proposition 'there is a house 
which no one perceives,' or, better still, 'there is a house which 
no one either perceives or conceives.' " This proposition is com- 
posed entirely of intelligible words, and the words are correctly 
put together. Whether the proposition is true or false, I do not 
know; but I am sure that it cannot be shown to be self-contra- 
dictory. Some closely similar propositions can be proved. For 
instance: the number of possible multiplications of two integers 
is infinite, therefore there are some that have never been thought 
of. Berkeley's argument, if valid, would prove that this is 
impossible. 

The fallacy involved is a very common one. We can, by means 
of concepts drawn from experience, construct statements about 
classes some or all of whose members are not experienced. Take 
some perfectly ordinary concept, say "pebble" ; this is an empirical 
concept derived from perception. But it does not follow that all 
pebbles are perceived, unless we include the fact of being per- 
ceived in our definition of "pebble." Unless we do this, the 
concept "unperceived pebble" is logically unobjectionable, in spite 
of the fact that it is logically impossible to perceive an instance 
of it. 

Schematically, the argument is as follows. Berkeley says: 
"Sensible objects must be sensible. A is a sensible object. There- 
fore A/nust be sensible." But if "must" indicates logical necessity, 
,jthe argument is only valid if A must be a sensible object. The 
argument does not prove that, from the properties of A other 
than its being sensible, it can be deduced that A is sensible. It 
does not prove, for example, that colours intrinsically indistin- 
guishable from those that we see may not exist unseen. We may 
believe on physiological grounds that this does not occur, but 
such grounds are empirical; so far as logic is concerned, there is 

678 



BERKELEY 

no reason why there should not be colours where there is no eye 
or brain. 

I come now to Berkeley's empirical arguments. To begin with, 
it is a sign of weakness to combine empirical and logical arguments, 
for the latter, if valid, make the former superfluous. 1 If I am con- 
tending that a square cannot be round, I shall not appeal to the 
fact that no Square in any known city is round. But as we have 
rejected the logical arguments, it becomes necessary to consider 
the empirical arguments on their merits. 

The first of the empirical arguments is an odd one: That heat 
cannot be in the object, because "the most vehement and intense 
degree of heat [is] a very great pain and we cannot suppose "any 
unperceiving thing capable of pain or pleasure." There is an 
ambiguity in the word "pain," of which Berkeley takes advantage. 
It may mean the painful quality of a sensation, or it may mean 
the sensation that has this quality. We say a broken leg is painful, 
without implying that the leg is in the mind ; it might be, similarly, 
that heat causes pain, and that this is all we ought to mean when 
we say it is a pain. This argument, therefore, is a poor one. 

The argument about the hot and cold hands in lukewarm water 
strictly speaking, would only prove that what we perceive in that 
experiment is not hot and cold, but hotter and colder. There is 
nothing to prove that these are subjective. 

In regard to tastes, the argument from pleasure and pain is 
repeated: Sweetness is a pleasure and bitterness a pain, therefore 
both are mental. It is also urged that a thing that tastes sweet 
when I am well may taste bitter when I am ill. Very similar argu- 
ments are used about odours: since they are pleasant or unpleasant, 
"they cannot exist in any but a perceiving substance or mind/' 
Berkeley assumes, here and everywhere, that what does not inhere 
in matter must inhere in a mental substance, and that nothing 
can be both mental and material. 

The argument in regard to sound is ad hominem. Hylas ^ys that 
sounds are "really 91 motions in the air, and Philonous retorts that 
motions can be seen or felt, not heard, so that "real" sounds an 
inaudible. This is hardly a fair argument, since percepts of motion, 
according to Berkeley, are just as subjective as other percepts. The 
motions that Hylas requires will have to be unperceived and 

1 E.g., " I was not drunk last night. I had only had two glasses : besides, 
it is well known that I am a teetotaller/ 9 

679 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

imperceptible. Nevertheless it is valid in so far as it points out 
that sound, as heard, cannot be identified with die motions of 
air that physics regards as its cause. 

Hylas, after abandoning secondary qualities, is not yet ready to 
abandon primary qualities, viz. Extension, Figure, Solidity, 
Gravity, Motion, and Rest. The argument, naturally, concentrates 
on extension and motion. If things have real sizes, says Philonous, 
the same thing cannot be of different sizes at the same time, and 
yet it looks larger when we are near it than when we are far off. 
And if motion is really in the object, how comes it that the same 
motion may seem fast to one and slow to another ? Such arguments 
must, I think, be allowed to prove the subjectivity of perceived 
space. But this subjectivity is physical: it is equally true of a 
camera, and therefore does not prove that shape is "mental." 
In the second Dialogue Philonous sums up the discussion, so 
far as it has gone, in the words: "Besides spirits, all that we know 
or conceive are our own ideas." He ought not, of course, to make 
an exception for spirits, since it is just as impossible to know 
spirit as to know matter. The arguments, in fact, are almost 
identical in both cases. 

Let us now try to state what positive conclusions we can reach 
as a result of the kind of argument inaugurated by Berkeley. 

Things as we know them are bundles of sensible qualities: a 
table, for example, consists of its visual shape, its hardness, the 
noise it emits when rapped, and its smell (if any). These different 
qualities have certain contiguities in experience, which lead 
common sense to regard them as belonging to one "thing," but 
the concept of "thing" or "substance" adds nothing to the 
perceived qualities, and is unnecessary. So far we are on firm 
ground. 

But we must now ask ourselves what we mean by "perceiving." 
Philonous maintains that, as regards sensible things, their reality 
consistent their being perceived; but he does not tell us what he 
means by perception. There is a theory, which he rejects, that 
perception is a relation between a subject and a percept. Since he 
believed the ego to be a substance, he might well have adopted 
this theory; however, he decided against it. For those who reject 
the notion of a substantial ego, this theory is impossible. What, 
then, is meant by calling something a "percept"? Does it mean 
anything more than that the something in question occurs? Can 

680 



BERKELEY 

we turn Berkeley's dictum round, and instead of saying that reality 
consists in being perceived, say that being perceived consists in 
being real? However this may be, Berkeley holds it logically 
possible that there should be unperceived things, since he holds 
that some real things, viz. spiritual substances, are unperceived. 
And it seems obvious that, when we say that an event is perceived, 
we mean something more than that it occurs. 

What is this more? One obvious difference between perceived 
and unperceived events is that the former, but not the latter, can 
be remembered. Is there any other difference? 

Recollection is one of a whole genus of effects which are more 
or less peculiar to the phenomena that we naturally call "mental." 
These effects are connected with habit. A burnt child fears the 
fire; a burnt poker does not. The physiologist, however, deals 
with habit and kindred matters as a characteristic of nervous 
tissue, and has no need to depart from a physicalist interpretation. 
In physicalist language, we can say that an occurrence is "per- 
ceived" if it has effects of certain kinds; in this sense we might 
almost say that a watercourse "perceives" the rain by which it is 
deepened, and that a river valley is a "memory" of former down- 
pours. Habit and memory, when described in physicalist terms, 
are not wholly absent in dead matter; the difference, in this 
respect, between living and dead matter, is only one of degree. 

In this view, to say that an event is "perceived" is to say that 
it has effects of certain kinds, and there is no reason, either logical 
or empirical, for supposing that all events have effects of these kinds. 

Theory of knowledge suggests a different standpoint. We start, 
here, not from finished science, but from whatever knowledge is 
the ground for our belief in science. This is what Berkeley is doing. 
Here it is not necessary, in advance, to define a "percept." The 
method, in outline, is as follows. We collect the propositions that 
we feel we know without inference, and we find that most of 
these have to do with dated particular events. These events we 
define as "percepts." Percepts, therefore, are those events that 
we know without inference; or at least, to allow for memory, such 
events were at some time percepts. We are then faced with the 
question: Can we, from our own percepts, infer any other events? 
Here four positions are possible, of which the first three are forms 
of idealism. 

(i) We may deny totally the validity of all inferences from any 

681 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

present percepts and memories to other events. This view must 
be taken by anyone who confines inference to deduction. Any 
event, and any group of events, is logically capable of standing 
alone, and therefore no group of events affords demonstrative proof 
of the existence of other events. If, therefore, we confine inference 
to deduction, the known world is confined to those events in our 
own biography that we perceive or have perceived, if memory 
is admitted. 

(2) The second position, which is solipsism as ordinarily under- 
stood, allows some inference from my percepts, but only to other 
events in my own biography. Take, for example, the view that, 
at any moment in waking life, there are sensible objects that we do 
not notice. We see many things without saying to ourselves that 
we see them; at least, so it seems. Keeping the eyes fixed in an 
environment in which we perceive no movement, we can notice 
various things in succession, and we feel persuaded that they were 
visible before we noticed them; but before we noticed them they 
were not data for theory of knowledge. This degree of inference 
from what we observe is made unreflectingly by everybody, even 
by those who most wish to avoid an undue extension of our 
knowledge beyond experience. 

(3) The third position which seems to be held, for instance, 
by Eddington is that it is possible to make inferences to other 
events analogous to those in our own experience, and that, there- 
fore, we have a right to believe that there are, for instance, colours 
seen by other people but not by ourselves, toothaches felt by 
other people, pleasures enjoyed and pains endured by other people, 
and so on, but that we have no right to infer events experienced 
by no one and not forming part of any "mind." This view may 
be defended on the ground that all inference to events which 
lie outside my observation is by analogy, and that events which no 
one experiences are not sufficiently analogous to my data to warrant 
analogical inferences. 

(4) The fourth position is that of common sense and traditional 
physics, according to which there are, in addition to my own 

and other people's, also events which no one experi- 



encesfor example, the furniture of my bedroom when I am 
asleep and it is pitch dark. G. E. Moore once accused idealists of 
holding that trains only have wheels while they are in stations, 
on the ground that passengers cannot see the wheels while they 

682 



BERKELEY 

remain in the train. Common sense refuses to believe that the 
wheels suddenly spring into being whenever you look, but do not 
bother to exist when no one is inspecting them. When this point 
of view is scientific, it bases the inference to unperceived events on 
causal laws. 

I do not propose, at present, to decide between these four points 
of view. The decision, if possible at all, can only be made by an 
elaborate investigation of non-demonstrative inference and the 
theory of probability. What I do propose to do is to point out 
certain logical errors which have been committed by those who 
have discussed these questions. 

Berkeley, as we have seen, thinks that there are logical reasons 
proving that only minds and mental events can exist. This view, 
on other grounds, is also held by Hegel and his followers. I believe 
this to be a complete mistake. Such a statement as "there was a 
time before life existed on this planet," whether true or false, 
cannot be condemned on grounds of logic, any more than "there 
are multiplication sums which no one will have ever worked out." 
To be observed, or to be a percept, is merely to have effects of 
certain kinds, and there is no logical reason why all events should 
have effects of these kinds. 

There is, however, another kind of argument, which, while it 
does not establish idealism as a metaphysic, does, if valid, establish 
it as a practical policy. It is said that a proposition which is un- 
verifiable has no meaning ; that verification depends upon percepts ; 
and that, therefore, a proposition about anything except actual or 
possible percepts is meaningless. I think that this view, strictly 
interpreted, would confine us to the first of the above four theories, 
and would forbid us to speak about anything that we have not 
purselves explicitly noticed. If so, it is a view that no one can hold 
in practice, which is a defect in a theory that is advocated on 
practical grounds. The whole question of verification, and its 
connection with knowledge, is difficult and complex^ I will, 
therefore, leave it on one side for the present. 

The fourth of the above theories, which admits events that r 
one perceives, may also be defended by invalid arguments. *, 
may be held that causality is kno\qp a priori, and that causal laws 
are impossible unless there are unperceived events. As against 
this, it may be urged that causality is not a priori, and that what- 
ever regularity can be observed must be in relation to percepts. 

683 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Whatever (here is reason to believe in the laws of physics must, it 
would seem, be capable of being stated in terms of percepts. The 
statement may be odd and complicated; it may lack the charac- 
teristic of continuity which, until lately, was expected of a physical 
law. But it can hardly be impossible. 

I conclude that there is no a priori objection to any one of our 
four theories. It is possible, however, to say that all truth is prag- 
matic, and that there is no pragmatic difference between the four 
theories. If this is true, we can adopt whichever we please, and the 
difference between them is only linguistic. I cannot accept this 
view; but this, also, is a matter for discussion at a later stage. 

It remains to be asked whether any meaning can be attached to 
the words "mind" and "matter." Everyone knows that "mind" 
is what an idealist thinks there is nothing else but, and "matter" 
is what a materialist thinks the same about. The reader knows 
also, I hope, that idealists are virtuous and materialists are wicked. 
But perhaps there may be more than this to be said. 

My own definition of "matter" may seem unsatisfactory; I 
should define it as what satisfies the equations of physics. There 
may be nothing satisfying these equations; in that case either 
physics, or the concept "matter," is a mistake. If we reject sub- 
stance, "matter" will have to be a logical construction. Whether it 
can be any construction composed of events which may be partly 
inferred is a difficult question, but by no means an insoluble one. 

As for "mind," when substance has been rejected a mind must 
be some group or structure of events. The grouping must be 
effected by some relation which is characteristic of the sort of 
phenomena we wish to call "mental." We may take memory as 
typical. We might though this would be rather unduly simple 
define a "mental" event as one which remembers or is remembered. 
Then the "mind" to which a given mental event belongs is the 
group of events connected with the given event by memory- 
chains, Backwards or forwards. 

It will be seen that, according to the above definitions, a mind 
*and a piece of matter are, each of them, a group of events. There 
is no reason why every event should belong to a group of one 
kind or the other, and there ift.no reason why some events should 
not belong to both groups; therefore some events may be neither 
mental nor material; and other events may be both. As to this, 
only detailed empirical considerations can decide. 

684 



Chapter XVII 
HUME 

DAVID HUME (1711-76) is one of the most important among 
philosophers, because he developed to its logical conclusion 
the empirical philosophy of Locke and Berkeley, and by 
making it self-consistent made it incredible. He represents, in a 
certain sense, a dead end: in his direction, it is impossible to go 
further. To refute him has been, ever since he wrote, a favourite 
pastime among metaphysicians. For my part, I find none of their 
refutations convincing; nevertheless, I cannot but hope that some- 
thing less sceptical than Hume's system may be discoverable. 

His chief philosophical work, the Treatise of Human Nature, 
was written while he was living in France during the years 1734 
to 1737. The first two volumes were published in 1739, the third 
in 1740. He was a very young man, not yet in his thirties; he was 
not well known, and his conclusions were such as almost all schools 
would find unwelcome. He hoped for vehement attacks, which 
he would meet with brilliant retorts. Instead, no one noticed the 
book; as he says himself, "it fell dead-born from the press." 
"But," he adds, "being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine 
temper, I very soon recovered from the blow." He devoted himself 
to the writing of essays, of which he produced the first volume in 
1741. In 1744 he made an unsuccessful attempt to obtain a pro- 
fessorship at Edinburgh; having failed in this, he became first 
tutor to a lunatic and then secretary to a general. Fortified by these 
credentials, he ventured again into philosophy. He shortened the 
Treatise by leaving out the best parts and most of the reasons for 
his conclusions; the result was the Inquiry into Human Under- 
standing, for a long time much better known than the Treatise. 
It was this book that awakened Kant from his "c|pgmatic 
slumbers"; he does not appear to have known the Treatise. 

He wrote also Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, which he 
kept unpublished during his lifetime. By his direction, they were 
published posthumously in 1779. His Essay on Miracles, which 
became famous, maintains that there can never be adequate 
historical evidence for such events. 
His History of England, published in 1755 and following years, 

685 



WBSTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

devoted itself to proving the superiority of Tories to Whigs and 
of Scotchmen to Englishmen; he did not consider history worthy 
of philosophic detachment. He visited Paris in 1763, and was 
made much of by the pUhsophes. Unfortunately, he formed a 
friendship with Rousseau, and had a famous quarrel with him. 
Hume behaved with admirable forbearance, but Rousseau, who 
suffered from persecution mania, insisted upon a violent breach. 

Hume has described his own character in a self-obituary, or 
"funeral oration," as he calls it: "I was a man of mild dispositions, 
of command of temper, of an open, social and cheerful humour, 
capable of attachment, but little susceptible of enmity, and of 
great moderation in all my passions. Even my love of literary 
fame, my ruling passion, never soured my temper, notwithstanding 
my frequent disappointments/ 9 All this is borne out by everything 
that is known of him. 

Hume's Treatise of Human Nature is divided into three books, 
dealing respectively with the understanding, the passions, and 
morals. What is important and novel in his doctrines is in die 
first book, to which I shall confine myself. 

He begins with the distinction between "impressions' 1 and 
"ideas.** These are two kinds of perceptions, of which impressions 
are those that have more force and violence. "By ideas I mean the 
faint images of these in thinking and reasoning/' Ideas, at least 
when simple, are like impressions, but fainter. "Every simple idea 
has a simple impression, which resembles it; and every simple 
impression a correspondent idea." "All our simple ideas in their 
first appearance are derived from simple impressions, which are 
correspondent to them, and which they exactly represent." 
Complex ideas, on the other hand, need not resemble impressions. 
We can imagine a winged horse without having ever seen one, 
but the constituents of this complex idea are all derived from 
impressions. The proof that impressions come first is derived 
from yperience; for example, a man born blind has no ideas of 
colours. Among ideas, those that retain a considerable degree of 
the vivacity of the original impressions belong to memory, the 
others to ttnag&uxtoon. 

There is a section (Book Impart i, sec. vii) "Of Abstract Ideas," 
which opens with a paragraph of emphatic agreement with 
Berkeley's doctrine that "all general ideas are nothing but par- 
ticular ones, annexed to a certain term, which gives them a more 

686 



HUMS 

extensive significance, and makes them recall upon occasion other 
individuals, which are similar to them. 91 He contends that, when 
we have an idea of a man, it has all the particularity that the 
impression of a man has. "The mind cannot form any notion of 
quantity or quality without forming a precise notion of degrees 
of each." "Abstract ideas are in themselves individual, however 
they may become general in their representation." This theory, 
which is a modern, form of nominalism, has two defects, one 
logical, the other psychological. To begin with the logical objec- 
tion : "When we have found a resemblance among several objects," 
Hume says, "we apply the same name to all of them." Every 
nominalist would agree. But in fact a common name, such as 
"cat," is just as unreal as the universal CAT is. The nominalist 
solution of the problem of universals thus fails through being 
insufficiently drastic in the application of its own principles; it 
mistakenly applies these principles only to "things," and not also 
to words. 

The psychological objection is more serious, at least in con- 
nection with Hume. The whole theory of ideas as copies of im- 
pressions, as he sets it forth, suffers from ignoring vagueness. 
When, for example, I have seen a flower of a certain colour, and 
I afterwards call up an image of it, the image is lacking in pre- 
cision, in this sense, that there are several closely similar shades 
of colour of which it might be an image, or "idea," in Hume's 
terminology. It is not true that "the mind cannot form any notion 
of quantity or quality without forming a precise notion of degrees 
of each." Suppose you have seen a man whose height is six feet 
one inch. You retain an image of him, but it probably would fit 
a man half an inch taller or shorter. Vagueness is different from 
generality, but has some of the same characteristics. By not 
noticing it, Hume runs into unnecessary difficulties, for instance, 
as to the possibility of imagining a shade of colour you have 
never seen, which is intermediate between two closely similar 
shades that you have seen. If these two are sufficiently^similar, 
any image you can form will be equally applicable to both of 
them and to the intermediate shade. When Hume says that ideas 
are derived from impressions which they exactly represent he 
goes beyond what is psychological!/ true. 

Hume banished the conception of substance from psychology, 
as Berkeley had banished it from physics. There is, he says, no 

687 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

impression of self, and therefore no idea of self (Book I, pan iv, 
sec. vi). "For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I 
call myself 9 I always stumble on some particular perception or 
other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or 
pleasure. I never catch myself at any time without a perception, 
and never can observe anything but the perception." There may, 
he ironically concedes, be some philosophers who can perceive 
their selves; "but setting aside some metaphysicians of this kind, 
I may venture to affirm of the rest of mankind, that they are 
nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which 
succeed each other with inconceivable rapidity, and are in a 
perpetual flux and movement." 

This repudiation of the idea of the Self is of great importance. 
Let us see exactly what it maintains, and how far it is valid. To 
begin with, the Self, if there is such a thing, is never perceived, 
and therefore we can have no idea of it. If this argument is to be 
accepted, it must be carefully stated. No man perceives his own 
brain, yet, in an important sense, he has an "idea" of it. Such 
"ideas," which are inferences from perceptions, are not among 
the logically basic stock of ideas; they are complex and descriptive 
this must be the case if Hume, is right in his principle that all 
simple ideas are derived from impressions, and if this principle 
is rejected, we are forced back on "innate" ideas. Using modern 
terminology, we may say: Ideas of unperceived things or occur- 
rences can always be defined in terms of perceived things or 
occurrences, and therefore, by substituting the definition for the 
term defined, we can always state what we know empirically with- 
out introducing any unperceived things or occurrences. As regards 
our present problem, all psychological knowledge can be stated 
without introducing the "Self." Further, the "Self," as defined, 
can be nothing but a bundle of perceptions, not a new simple 
"thing." In this I think that any thoroughgoing empiricist must 
agree with Hume. 

It ddfcs not follow that there is no simple Self; it only follows 
that we cannot know whether there is or not, and that the Self, 
except as a 'bundle* of perceptions, cannot enter into any part of 
our knowledge. This conclusion is important in metaphysics, as 
getting rid of the last surviving use of "substance." It is important 
io theology, as abolishing all supposed knowledge of the "soul." 
It is important in the analysis of knowledge, since it shows that 

688 



HUME 

the category of subject and object is not fundamental. In this 
matter of the ego Hume made an important advance on Berkeley. 

The most important part of the whole Treatise is the section 
called "Of Knowledge and Probability." Hume does not mean by 
"probability" the sort of knowledge contained in the mathematical 
theory of probability, such as that the chance of throwing double 
sixes with two dice is one thirty-sixth. This knowledge is not itself 
probable in any special sense; it has as much certainty as know- 
ledge can have. What Hume is concerned with is uncertain know- 
ledge, such as is obtained from empirical data by inferences that 
are not demonstrative. This includes all our knowledge as to the 
future, and as to unobserved portions of the past and present. In 
fact, it includes everything except, on the one hand, direct obser- 
vation, and, on the other, logic and mathematics. The analysis 
of such "probable" knowledge led Hume to certain sceptical 
conclusions, which are equally difficult to refute and to accept. 
The result was a challenge to philosophers, which, in my opinion, 
has still not been adequately met. 

Hume begins by distinguishing seven kinds of philosophical 
relation: resemblance, identity, relations of time and place, pro- 
portion in quantity or number, degrees in any quality, contrariety, 
and causation. These, he says, may be divided into two kinds: 
those that depend only on the ideas, and those that can be changed 
without any change in the ideas. Of the first kind are resemblance, 
contrariety, degrees in quality, and proportions in quantity or 
number. But spatio-temporal and causal relations are of the 
second kind. Only relations of the first kind give certain knowledge ; 
our knowledge concerning the others is only probable. Algebra 
and arithmetic are the only sciences in which we can carry on a 
long chain of reasoning without losing certainty. Geometry is not 
so certain as algebra and arithmetic, because we cannot be sure 
of the truth of its axioms. It is a mistake to suppose, as many 
philosophers do, that the ideas of mathematics "must be com- 
prehended by a pure and intellectual view, of which the superior 
faculties of the soul are alone capable." The falsehood of this view 
is evident, says Hume, as soon as we remember that "all our 
ideas are copied from our impressioqp." 

The three relations that depend not only on ideas are identity, 
spatio-temporal relations, and causation. In the first two, the mind 
does not go beyond what is immediately present to the senses, 

689 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

(Spatio-temporal relations, Hume holds, can be perceived, and 
can form parts of impressions.) Causation alone enables us to 
infer some thing or occurrence from some other thing or occur- 
rence: " Tis only causation, which produces such a connexion, 
as to give us assurance from the existence or action of one object, 
that 'twas followed or preceded by any other existence or action." 
A difficulty arises from Hume's contention that there is no such 
thing as an impression of a causal relation. We can perceive, by 
mere observation of A and B, that A is above B, or to the right of 
B, but not that A causes B. In the past, the relation of causation 
had been more or less assimilated to that of ground and consequent 
in logic, but this, Hume rightly perceived, was a mistake. 

In the Cartesian philosophy, as in that of the Scholastics, the 
connection of cause and effect was supposed to be necessary, as 
logical connections are necessary. The first really serious challenge 
to this view came from Hume, with whom the modern philo- 
sophy of causation begins. He, in common with almost all philo- 
sophers down to and including Bergson, supposes the law to 
state that there are propositions of the form "A causes B," where 
A and B are classes of events; the fact that such laws do not 
occur in any well-developed science appears to be unknown to 
philosophers. But much of what they have said can be translated 
so as to be applicable to causal laws such as do occur; we may, 
therefore, ignore this point for the present. 

Hume begins by observing that the power by which one object 
produces another is not discoverable from the ideas of the two 
objects, and that we can therefore only know cause and effect 
from experience, not from reasoning or reflection. The statement 
"what begins must have a cause," he says, is not one that has 
intuitive certainty, like the statements of logic. As he puts it: 
"There is no object, which implies the existence of any other if 
we consider these objects in themselves, and never look beyond 
the ideas which we form of them." Hume argues from this that 
it must be experience that gives knowledge of cause and effect, 
but that it cannot be merely the experience of the two events A 
and B which are in a causal relation to each other. It must be 
experience, because the correction is not logical; and it cannot 
be merely the experience of the particular events A and B, since 
we can discover nothing in A by itself which should lead it to 
produce B. The experience required, he says, is that of the con* 

690 



HUME 

slant conjunction of events of the kind A with events of the kind 
B. He points out that when, in experience, two objects are con** 
stantly conjoined, we do in fact infer one from the other. (When 
he says "infer/ 9 he means that perceiving the one makes us expect 
the other; he does not mean a formal or explicit inference.) 
"Perhaps, the necessary connection depends on the inference/ 9 
not vice versa. That is to say, the sight of A causes the expectation 
of B, and so leads us to believe that there is a necessary connection 
between A and B. The inference is not determined by reason, 
since that would require us to assume the uniformity of nature, 
which itself is not necessary, but only inferred from experience. 

Hume is thus led to the view that, when we say "A causes B," 
we mean only that A and B are constantly conjoined in fact, not 
that there is some necessary connection between them. "We have 
no other notion of cause and effect, but that of certain objects, 
which have been always conjoined together. ... We cannot 
penetrate into the reason of the conjunction. 99 

He backs up his theory with a definition of "belief, 99 which is, 
he maintains, "a lively idea related to or associated with a present 
impression. 99 Through association, if A and B have been con- 
stantly conjoined in past experience, the impression of A produces 
that lively idea of B which constitutes belief in B. This explains 
why we believe A and B to be connected: the percept of A & 
connected with the idea of B, and so we come to think that A is 
connected with B, though this opinion is really groundless. 
"Objects have no discoverable connexion together; nor is it from 
any other principle but custom operating upon the imagination, 
that we can draw any inference from the appearance of one to the 
experience of another. 99 He repeats many times the contention 
that what appears to us as necessary connection among objects is 
really only connection among the ideas of those objects: the mind 
is determined by custom, and " 'tis this impression, or determina- 
tion, which affords me the idea of necessity. 99 The repetition of 
instances, which leads us to the belief that A causes B, gives 
nothing new in the object, but in the mind leads to an association 
of ideas; thus "necessity is something that exists in the mind, 
not in objects. 99 

Let us now ask ourselves what we are to think of Hume's 
doctrine. It has two parts, one objective, the other subjective. 
The objective part says: When we judge that A causes B, what 

691 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

has in fact happened, so far as A and B are concerned, is that they 
have been frequently observed to be conjoined, i.e. A has been 
immediately, or very quickly, followed by B; we have no right 
to say that A must be followed by B, or will be followed by B 
on future occasions. Nor have we any ground for supposing that, 
however often A is followed by B, any relation beyond sequence 
is .involved. In fact, causation is definable in terms of sequence, 
and is not an independent notion. 

The subjective part of the doctrine says: The frequently ob- 
served conjunction of A and B causes the impression of A to 
cause the idea of B. But if we are to define "cause" as is suggested 
in the objective part of the doctrine, we must reword the above. 
Substituting the definition of "cause," the above becomes: 

"It has been frequently observed that the frequently observed 
conjunction of two objects A and B has been frequently followed 
by occasions on which the impression of A was followed by the 
idea of B." 

This statement, we may admit, is true, but it has hardly the 
scope that Hume attributes to the subjective part of his doctrine. 
He contends, over and over again, that the frequent conjunction 
of A and B gives no reason for expecting them to be conjoined in 
the future, but is merely a cause of this expectation. That is to say: 
Experience of frequent conjunction is frequently conjoined with 
a habit of association. But, if the objective part of Hume's doctrine 
is accepted, the fact that, in the past, associations have been 
frequently formed in such circumstances, is no reason for sup- 
posing that they will continue, or that new ones will be formed in 
similar circumstances. The fact is that, where psychology is con- 
cerned, Hume allows himself to believe in causation in a sense 
which, in general, he condemns. Let us take an illustration. I see 
an appk, and expect that, if I eat it, I shall experience a certain 
kind of taste. According to Hume, there is no reason why I 
should experience this kind of taste: the law of habit explains the 
existence of my expectation, but does not justify it. But the law 
of habit is itself a causal law. Therefore if we take Hume seriously 
we must say: Although in the past the sight of an apple has been 
conjoined with expectation *f a certain kind of taste, there is no 
reason why it should continue to be so conjoined: perhaps the 
next time I tee an apple I shall expect it to taste like roast beef. 
You may, at the moment, think this unlikely; but that is no reason 

692 



HUME 

for expecting that you will think it unlikely five minutes hence. 
If Hume's objective doctrine is right, we have no better reason 
for expectations in psychology than in the physical world. Hume's 
theory might be caricatured as follows: "The proposition 'A 
causes B' means 'the impression of A causes the idea of B.' " 
As a definition, this is not a happy effort. 

We must therefore examine Hume's objective doctrine more 
closely. This doctrine has two parts: (i) When we say "A causes 
B," all that we have a right to say is that, in past experience, A 
and B have frequently appeared together or in rapid succession, 
and no instance has been observed of A not followed or accom- 
panied by B. (2) However many instances we may have observed 
of the conjunction of A and B, that gives no reason for expecting 
them to be conjoined on a future occasion, though it is a cause of 
this expectation, i.e. it has been frequently observed to be con- 
joined with such an expectation. These two parts of the doctrine 
may be stated as follows: (i) in causation there is no indefinable 
relation except conjunction or succession ; (2) induction by simple 
enumeration is not a valid form of argument. Empiricists in 
general have accepted the first of these theses and rejected the 
second. When I say they have rejected the second, I mean that 
they have believed that, given a sqfficiently vast accumulation of 
instances of a conjunction, the likelihood of the conjunction being 
found in the next instance will exceed a half; or, if they have not 
held exactly this, they have maintained some doctrine having 
similar consequences. 

I do not wish, at the moment, to discuss induction, which is a 
large and difficult subject ; for the moment, I am content to observe 
that, if the first half of Hume's doctrine is admitted, the rejection 
of induction makes all expectation as to the future irrational, even 
the expectation that we shall continue to feel expectations. I do 
not mean merely that our expectations may be mistaken; that, in 
any case, must be admitted. I mean that, taking even our Ijrmest 
expectations, such as that the sun will rise to-morrow, there is 
not a shadow of a reason for supposing them more likely to be 
verified than not. With this proviso, I return to the meaning of 



"cause. 



Those who disagree with Hume maintain that "cause" is a 
specific relation, which entails invariable sequence, but is not 
entailed by it. To revert to the clocks of the Cartesians: two 

693 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

perfectly accurate chronometers might strike the hours one after 
the other invariably, without either being the cause of the other's 
striking. In general, those who take this view maintain that we 
can sometimes perceive causal relations, though in most cases we 
are obliged to infer them, more or less precariously, from constant 
conjunction. Let us see what arguments there are for and against 
Hume on this point 

Hume summarizes his argument as follows: 

"I am sensible, that of all the paradoxes, which I have had, or 
shall hereafter have occasion to advance in the course of this 
treatise, the present one is the most violent, and that 'tis merely 
by dint of solid proof and reasoning I can ever hope it will have 
admission, and overcome the inveterate prejudices of mankind. 
Before we are reconciled to this doctrine, how often must we 
repeat to ourselves, that the simple view of any two objects or 
actions, however related, can never give us any idea of power, or 
of a connexion betwixt them: that this idea arises from a repeti- 
tion of their union: that the repetition neither discovers nor 
causes anything in the objects, but has an influence only on the 
mind, by that customary transition it produces: that this cus- 
tomary transition is, therefore, the same with the power and 
necessity, which are consequently felt by the soul, and not 
perceiv'd externally in bodies?" 

Hume is commonly accused of having too atomic a view of per- 
ception, but he allows that certain relations can be perceived. 
"We ought not," he says, "to receive as reasoning any of the 
observations we make concerning identity, and the relations of 
time and place; since in none of them the mind can go beyond 
what is immediately present to the senses.' 9 Causation, he says, 
is different in that it takes us beyond the impressions of our senses, 
and informs us of unperceived existences. As an argument, this 
seems invalid. We believe in many relations of time and place 
whicjt we cannot perceive: we think that time extends backwards 
and forwards, and space beyond the walls of our room. Hume's 
real argument is that, while we sometimes perceive relations of 
time and place, we never perceive causal relations, which must 
therefore, if admitted, bo inferred from relations that can be 
perceived. The controversy is thus reduced to one of empirical 
Act: Do we, or do we not, sometimes perceive a relation which 
ca* be called causal? Hume says no, his adversaries say yes, and 

694 



HUME 

it is not easy to see how evidence can be produced by either side. 

I think perhaps the strongest argument on Hume's side is to 
be derived from the character of causal laws in physics. It appears 
that simple rules of the form "A causes B" are never to be admitted 
in science, except as crude suggestions in early stages. The causal 
laws by which such simple rules are replaced in well-developed 
sciences are so complex that no one can suppose them given in 
perception ; they are all, obviously, elaborate inferences from the 
observed course of nature. I am leaving out of account modern 
quantum theory, which reinforces the above conclusion. So for 
as the physical sciences are concerned, Hume is wholly in the 
right ; such propositions as "A causes B" are never to be accepted, 
and our inclination to accept them is to be explained by the laws 
of habit and association. These laws themselves, in their accurate 
form, will be elaborate statements as to nervous tissue primarily 
its physiology, then its chemistry, and ultimately its physics. 

The opponent of Hume, however, even if he admits the whole 
of what has just been said about the physical sciences, may not 
yet admit himself decisively defeated. He may say that in psy- 
chology we have cases where a causal relation can be perceived. 
The whole conception of cause is probably derived from volition, 
and it may be said that we can perceive a relation, between a 
volition and the consequent act, which is something more than 
invariable sequence. The same might be said of the relation 
between a sudden pain and a cry. Such views, however, are ren- 
dered very difficult by physiology. Between the will to move my 
arm and the consequent movement there is a long chain of causal 
intermediaries consisting of processes in the nerves and muscles. 
We perceive only the end terms of this process, the volition and 
the movement, and if we think we see a direct causal connection 
between these we arc mistaken. This argument is not conclusive 
on the general question, but it shows that it is rash to suppose 
that we perceive causal relations when we think we do. The 
balance, therefore, is in favour of Hume's view that there is 
nothing in cause except invariable succession. The evidence, 
however, is not so conclusive as Hume supposed. 

Hume is not content with reducing the evidence of a causal 
connection to experience of frequent conjunction; he proceeds to 
argue that such experience does not justify the expectation of 
similar conjunctions in the future. For example: when (to repeat 

695 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

a former illustration) I see an apple, past experience makes me 
expect that it will taste like an apple, and not like roast beef; but 
there is no rational justification for this expectation. If there were 
such a justification, it would have to proceed from the principle 
"that those instances, of which we have had no experience, re- 
semble those of which we have had experience." This principle 
is not logically necessary, since we can at least conceive a change 
in the course of nature. It should therefore be a principle of pro- 
bability. But all probable arguments assume this principle, and 
therefore it cannot itself be proved by any probable argument, 
or even rendered probable by any such argument. "The supposi- 
tion, that the future resembles the past, is not founded on arguments 
of any kind, but is derived entirely from habit." 1 The conclusion 
is one of complete scepticism: 

"All probable reasoning is nothing but a species of sensation. 
'Tis not solely in poetry and music, we must follow our taste and 
sentiment, but likewise in philosophy. When I am convinced of 
any principle, 'tis only an idea, which strikes more strongly upon 
me. When I give the preference to one set of arguments above 
another, I do nothing but decide from my feeling concerning the 
superiority of their influence. Objects have no discoverable con- 
nexion together; nor is it from any other principle but custom 
operating upon the imagination, that we can draw any inference 
from the appearance of one to the existence of another." 1 

The ultimate outcome of Hume's investigation of what passes 
for knowledge is not what we must suppose him to have desired. 
The sub-title of his book is: "An attempt to introduce the experi- 
mental method of reasoning into moral subjects." It is evident 
that he started out with a belief that scientific method yields the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; he ended, 
however, with the conviction that belief is never rational, since 
we know nothing. After setting forth the arguments for scepticism 
(Book I, part iv, sec. i), he goes on, not to refute the arguments, 
but to fall back on natural credulity. 

"Nature, by an absolute and uncontrollable necessity, has deter- 
mined us to judge as well as to breathe and feel ; nor can we any 
more forbear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller light, 
upon account of their customary connexion with a present im- 
pression, than we can hinder ourselves from thinking as long as 

1 Book I, part iii, tec. iv. * Book I, pan tti, arc. viti. 

696 



HUM! 

we are awake, or seeing the surrounding bodies, when we turn 
our eyes towards them in broad sunshine. Whoever has taken the 
pains to refute this total scepticism, has really disputed without 
an antagonist, and endeavoured by arguments to establish a 
faculty, which nature has antecedently implanted in the mind, 
and rendered unavoidable. My intention then in displaying so 
carefully the arguments of that fantastic sect, is only to make the 
reader sensible of the truth of my hypothesis, that all our reasonings 
concerning causes and effects are derived from nothing but custom; 
and that belief is more properly an act of the sensitive, than of the 
cogitative part of our natures. " 

"The sceptic," he continues (Book I, part iv, sec. ii), "still con- 
tinues to reason and believe, even though he asserts that he cannot 
defend his reason by reason ; and by the same rule he must assent 
to the principle concerning the existence of body, tho' he cannot 
pretend by any arguments of philosophy to maintain its veracity 
. . . We may well ask, wliat causes us to believe in the existence of 
body? But 'tis vain to ask, whether there be body or not? That is a 
point, which we must take for granted in all our reasonings." 

The above is the beginning of a section "Of scepticism with 
regard to the senses." After a long discussion, this section ends 
with the following conclusion : 

"This sceptical doubt, both with respect to reason and the senses, 
is a malady, which can never be radically cured, but must return 
upon us every moment, however we may chase it away, and some- 
times may seem entirely free from it. ... Carelessness and 
inattention alone can afford us any remedy. For this reason I rely 
entirely upon them ; and take it for granted, whatever may be the 
reader's opinion at this present moment, that an hour hence he 
will be persuaded there is both an external and internal world." 

There is no reason for studying philosophy so Hume main- 
tainsexcept that, to certain temperaments, this is an agreeable 
way of passing the time. "In all the incidents of life wrought 
still to preserve our scepticism. If we believe, that fire warms, or 
water refreshes, 'tis only because it costs us too much pains to 
think otherwise. Nay, if we are philosophers, it ought only to be 
upon sceptical principles, and from gn inclination which we feel 
to be employing ourselves after that manner." If he abandoned 
speculation, "I feel I should be a loser in point of pleasure; and 
this is the origin of my philosophy." 

697 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Hume's philosophy, whether true or false, represents the bank- 
ruptcy of eighteenth-century reasonableness. He starts out, like 
Locke, with the intention of being sensible and empirical, taking 
nothing on trust, but seeking whatever instruction is to be obtained 
from experience and observation. But having a better intellect 
than Locke's, a greater acuteness in analysis, and a smaller capacity 
for accepting comfortable inconsistencies, he arrives at the 
disastrous conclusion that from experience and observation 
nothing is to be learnt. There is no such thing as a rational belief: 
"If we believe that fire warms, or water refreshes, 'tis only because 
it costs us too much pains to think otherwise." We cannot help 
believing, but no belief can be grounded in reason. Nor can one 
line of action be more rational than another, since all alike are 
based upon irrational convictions. This last conclusion, however, 
Hume seems not to have drawn. Even in his most sceptical 
chapter, in which he sums up the conclusions of Book I, he says: 
"Generally speaking, the errors in religion are dangerous; those 
in philosophy only ridiculous. " He has no right to say this. 
"Dangerous" is a causal word, and a sceptic as to causation 
cannot know that anything is "dangerous." 

In fact, in the later portions of the Treatise, Hume forgets all 
about his fundamental doubts, and writes much as any other 
enlightened moralist of his time might have written ; he applies 
to his doubts the remedy that he recommends, namely "careless- 
ness and inattention." In a sense, his scepticism is insincere, 
since he cannot maintain it in practice. It has, however, this 
awkward consequence, that it paralyses every effort to prove one 
line of action better than another. 

It was inevitable that such a self-refutation of rationality should 
be followed by a great outburst of irrational faith. The quarrel 
between Hume and Rousseau is symbolic: Rousseau was mad 
but influential, Hume was sane but had no followers. Subsequent 
British empiricists rejected his scepticism without refuting it; 
Rousseau and his followers agreed with Hume that no belief is 
based on reason, but thought the heart superior to reason, and 
allowed it to lead them to convictions very different from those 
that Hume retained in practice. German philosophers, from Kant 
to Hegel, had not atsimilatrd Hume's arguments. I say this deli- 
berately, in spite of the belief which many philosophers share 
with Kant, that his Critique of Putt Ruuo* answered Hume. In 

698 



HUMB 

fact, these philosophers at least Kant and Hegel represent a 
pre-Humian type of rationalism, and can be refuted by Humian 
arguments. The philosophers who cannot be refuted in this way 
are those who do not pretend to be rational, such as Rousseau, 
Schopenhauer,, and Nietzsche. The growth of unreason through- 
out the nineteenth century and what has passed of the twentieth 
is a natural sequel to Hume's destruction of empiricism. 

It is therefore important to discover whether there is any answer 
to Hume within the framework of a philosophy that is wholly 
or mainly empirical. If not, there is no intellectual difference 
between sanity and insanity. The lunatic who believes that he is 
a poached egg is to be condemned solely on the ground that he is 
in a minority, or rather since we must not assume democracy 
on the ground that the government does not agree with him. 
This is a desperate point of view, and it must be hoped that there 
is some way of escaping from it. 

Hume's scepticism rests entirely upon his rejection of the prin- 
ciple of induction. The principle of induction, as applied to 
causation, says that, if A has been found very often accompanied 
or followed by B, and no instance is known of A not being accom- 
panied or followed by B, then it is probable that on the next 
occasion on which A is observed it will be accompanied or followed 
by B. If the principle is to be adequate, a sufficient number of 
instances must make the probability not far short of certainty. If 
this principle, or any other from which it can be deduced, is true, 
then the causal inferences which Hume rejects are valid, not 
indeed as giving certainty, but as giving a sufficient probability 
for practical purposes. If this principle is not true, every attempt 
to arrive at general scientific laws from particular observations is 
fallacious, and Hume's scepticism is inescapable for an empiricist. 
The principle itself cannot, of course, without circularity, be 
inferred from observed uniformities, since it is required to justify 
any such inference. It must therefore be, or be deduced from, 
an independent principle not based upon experience. *fo this 
extent, Hume has proved that pure empiricism is not a sufficient 
basis for science. But if this one principle is admitted, everything 
else can proceed in accordance with tfie theory that all our know- 
ledge is based on experience. It must be granted that this is a 
serious departure from pure empiricism, and that those who are 
not empiricists may ask why, if one departure is allowed, others 

699 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

are to be forbidden. These, however, are questions not directly 
raised by Hume's arguments. What these arguments prove and 
I do not think the proof can be controverted is, that induction 
is an independent logical principle, incapable of being inferred 
either from experience or from other logical principles, and that 
without this principle science is impossible. 



700 



Part 2. From Rousseau to the Present 'Day 

Chapter XVIII 
THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 

FROM the latter part of the eighteenth century to the present 
day, art and literature and philosophy, and even politics, have 
been influenced, positively or negatively, by a way of feeling 
which was characteristic of what, in a large sense, may be called 
the romantic movement. Even those who were repelled by this 
way of feeling were compelled to take account of it, and in many 
cases were more affected by it than they knew. I propose in this 
chapter to give a brief description of the romantic outlook, chiefly 
in matters not definitely philosophical; for this is the cultural 
background of most philosophic thought in the period with which 
we are now to be concerned. 

The romantic movement was not, in its beginnings, connected 
with philosophy, though it came before long to have connections 
with it. With politics, through Rousseau, it was connected from 
the first. But before we can understand its political and philo- 
sophical effects we must consider it in its most essential form, 
which is as a revolt against received ethical and aesthetic standards. 
The first great figure in the movement is Rousseau, but to some 
extent he only expressed already existing tendencies. Cultivated 
people in eighteenth-century France greatly admired what they 
called la scnsibilitc, which meant a proneness to emotion, and more 
particularly to the emotion of sympathy. To be thoroughly satis- 
factory, the emotion must be direct and violent and quite unin- 
formed by thought. The man of sensibility would be moved to 
tears by the sight of a single destitute peasant family, but Vould 
be cold to well-thought-out schemes for ameliorating the lot of 
peasants as a class. The poor were supposed to possess more 
virtue than the rich ; the sage was thought of as a man who retires 
from the corruption of courts to enjoy the peaceful pleasures of 
an unambitious rural existence. As a passing mood, this attitude 
is to be found in poets of almost all periods. The exiled Duke in 

701 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

As You Like It expresses it, though he goes back to his dukedom 
as soon as he can; only the melancholy Jaques sincerely prefers 
the life of the forest Even Pope, the perfect exemplar of all that 
the romantic movement rebelled against, says: 

Happy the man whose wish and care 

A few paternal acres bound, 
Content to breathe his native air 

On his own ground. 

The poor, in the imaginations of those who cultivated sensibility, 
always had a few paternal acres, and lived on the produce of their 
own labour without the need of external commerce. True, they 
were always losing the acres in pathetic circumstances, because 
the aged father could no longer work, the lovely daughter was 
going into a decline, and the wicked mortgagee or the nicked lord 
was ready to pounce either on the acres or on the daughter's virtue. 
The poor, to the romantics, were never urban and never industrial ; 
the proletariat is a nineteenth-century conception, perhaps equally 
romanticized, but quite different. 

Rousseau appealed to the already existing cult of sensibility, 
and gave it a breadth and scope that it might not otherwise have 
possessed. He was a democrat, not only in his theories, but in his 
tastes. For long periods of his life, he was a poor vagabond, 
receiving kindness from people only slightly less destitute than 
himself. He repaid this kindness, in action, often with the blackest 
ingratitude, but in emotion his response was all that the most 
ardent devotee of sensibility could have wished. Having the tastes 
of a tramp, he found the restraints of Parisian society irksome. 
From him the romantics learnt a contempt for the trammels of 
convention first in dress and manners, in the minuet and the 
heroic couplet, then in art and love, and at last over the whole 
sphere of traditional morals. 

The romantics were not without morals; on the contrary, their 
moral judgments were sharp and vehement. But they were based 
on quite other principles than those that had seemed good to their 
predecessors. The period from 1660 to Rousseau is dominated by 
recollections of the wars of religion and the civil wars in France 
and England and Germany. Men were very conscious of the 
danger of chaos, of the anarchic tendencies of all strong passions, 
of the importance of safety and the sacrifices necessary to achieve 

702 



THF ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 

it. Prudence was regarded as the supreme virtue; intellect was 
valued as the most effective weapon against subversive fanatics; 
polished manners were praised as a barrier against barbarism. 
Newton's orderly cosmos, in which the planets unchangingly 
revolve about the sun in law-abiding orbits, became an imaginative 
symbol of good government Restraint in the expression of 
passion was the chief aim of education, and the surest mark of a 
gentleman. In the Revolution, pre-romantic French aristocrats 
died quietly; Madame Roland and Danton, who were romantics, 
died rhetorically. 

By the time of Rousseau, many people had grown tired of 
safety, and had begun to desire excitement. The French Revolu- 
tion and Napoleon gave them their fill of it. When, in 1815, the 
political world returned to tranquillity, it was a tranquillity so 
dead, so rigid, so hostile to all vigorous life, that only terrified 
conservatives could endure it. Consequently there was no such 
intellectual acquiescence in the status quo as had characterized 
France under the Roi Soleil and England until the French Revo- 
lution. Nineteenth-century revolt against the system of the Holy 
Alliance took two forms. On the one hand, there was the revolt 
of industrialism, both capitalist and proletarian, against monarchy 
and aristocracy; this was almost untouched by romanticism, and 
reverted, in many respects, to the eighteenth century. This move- 
ment is represented by the philosophical radicals, the free-trade 
movement, and Marxian socialism. Quite different from this was 
the romantic revolt, which was in part reactionary, in part revo- 
lutionary. The romantics did not aim at peace and quiet, but at 
vigorous and passionate individual life. They had no sympathy 
with industrialism because it was ugly, because money-grubbing 
seemed to them unworthy of an immortal soul, and because the 
growth of modern economic organizations interfered with indi- 
vidual liberty. In the post-revolutionary period they were led into 
politics, gradually, through nationalism: each nation was^elt to 
have a corporate soul, which could not be free so long as the 
boundaries of States were different from those of nations. In the 
first half of the nineteenth century, nationalism was the most 
vigorous of revolutionary principles, nd most romantics ardently 
favoured it. 

The romantic movement is characterized, as a whole, by the 
substitution of aesthetic for utilitarian standards. The earth-worm 

703 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

is useful, but not beautiful; the tiger is beautiful, but not useful. 
Darwin (who was not a romantic) praised the earth-worm; Blake 
praised the tiger. The morals of the romantics have primarily 
aesthetic motives. But in order to characterize the romantics, it 
is necessary to take account, not only of the importance of aesthetic 
motives, but also of the change of taste which made their sense 
of beauty different from that of their predecessors. Of this, their 
preference for Gothic architecture is one of the most obvious 
examples. Another is their taste in scenery. Dr. Johnson preferred 
Fleet Street to any rural landscape, and maintained that a man 
who is tired of London must be tired of life. If anything in the 
country was admired by Rousseau's predecessors, it was a scene 
of fertility, with rich pastures and lowing kine. Rousseau, being 
Swiss, naturally admired the Alps. In his disciples* novels and 
stories, we find wild torrents, fearful precipices, pathless forests, 
thunder-storms, tempests at sea, and generally what is useless, 
destructive, and violent. This change seems to be more or less 
permanent: almost everybody, nowadays, prefers Niagara and 
the Grand Canyon to lush meadows and fields of waving corn. 
Tourist hotels afford statistical evidence of taste in scenery. 

The temper of the romantics is best studied in fiction. They 
liked what was strange: ghosts, ancient decayed castles, the last 
melancholy descendants of once-great families, practitioners of 
rism and the occult sciences, falling tyrants and levantinc 



pirates. Fielding and Smollett wrote of ordinary people in circum- 
stances that might well have occurred; so did the realists who 
reacted against romanticism. But to the romantics such themes 
were too pedestrian; they felt inspired only by what was grand, 
remote, and terrifying. Science, of a somewhat dubious sort, could 
be utilized if it led to something astonishing; but in the main the 
Middle Ages, and what was most medieval in the present, pleased 
the romantics best Very often they cut loose from actuality, 
either past or present, altogether. The Ancient Marina is typical 
in this respect, and Coleridge's Kubla Khan is hardly the historical 
monarch of Marco Polo. The geography of the romantics is in- 
teresting: from Xanadu to "the lone Chorasmian shore," the places 
in which it is interested are remote, Asiatic, or ancient. 

The romantic movement, in spite of owing its origin to Rousseau, 
was at first mainly German, lite German romantics were young 
in the last yean of the eighteenth century, and it was while they 



TUB ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 

were young that they gave expression to what was most charac- 
teristic in their outlook. Those who had not the good fortune to 
die young, in the end allowed their individuality to be obscured 
in the uniformity of the Catholic Church. (A romantic could 
become a Catholic if he had been born a Protestant, but could 
hardly be a Catholic otherwise, since it was necessary to combine 
Catholicism with revolt.) The German romantics influenced 
Coleridge and Shelley, and independently of German influence 
the same outlook became common in England during the early 
years of the nineteenth century. In France, though in a weakened 
form, it flourished after the Restoration, down to Victor Hugo. In 
America it is to be seen almost pure in Melville, Thoreau, and 
Brook Farm, and, somewhat softened, in Emerson and Hawthorne. 
Although romantics tended towards Catholicism, there was some- 
thing incradicably Protestant in the individualism of their outlook, 
and their permanent successes in moulding customs, opinions, and 
institutions were almost wholly confined to Protestant countries. 

The beginnings of romanticism in England can be seen in the 
writings of the satirists. In Sheridkn's Rivals (1775), the heroine 
is determined to marry some poor man for love rather than a rich 
man to please her guardian and his parents ; but the rich man whom 
they have selected wins her love by wooing her under an assumed 
name and pretending to be poor. Jane Austen makes fun of the 
romantics in Northanger Abbey and Sense and Sensibility (1797-8). 
Northanger Abbey has a heroine who is led astray by Mrs. Rad- 
cliffe's ultra-romantic Mysteries of Udolpho, which was published 
in 1794. The first good romantic work in England apart from 
Blake, who was a solitary Swedenborgian and hardly part of any 
"movement" was Coltridge'&Anrient Mariner, published in 1799. 
In the following year, having unfortunately been supplied with 
funds by the Wedgwoods, he went to Gftttingen and became 
engulfed in Kant, which did not improve his verse. 

After Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Southey had become reac- 
tionaries, hatred of the Revolution and Napoleon put a tenf)x>raiy 
brake on English romanticism. But it was soon revived by Byron, 
Shelley, and Keats, and in some degree dominated the whole 
Victorian epoch. 

Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, written under the inspiration of 
conversations with Byron in the romantic scenery of the Alps, 
contains what might almost be regarded as an allegorical prophetic 

Hutaty of W*Ur* P*ifewl*x 705 X ' 



WB8TERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

history of the development of romanticism. Frankenstein's monster 
is not, as he has become in proverbial parlance, a mere monster: 
he is, at first, a gentle being, longing for human affection, but he 
is driven to hatred and violence by the horror which his ugliness 
inspires in those whose love he attempts to gain. Unseen, he 
observes a virtuous family of poor cottagers, and surreptitiously 
assists their labours. At length he decides to make himself known 
to them: 

"The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim 
their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and 
loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed 
towards me with affection, was the utmost limit of my ambition. 
I dared not think that they would turn from me with disdain and 
honor." 

But they did. So he first demanded of his creator the creation of 
a female like himself, and, when that was refused, devoted himself 
to murdering, one by one, all whom Frankenstein loved. But even 
then, when all his murders are accomplished, and while he is 
gazing upon the dead bod/ of Frankenstein, the monster's 
tentimcnti remain noble: 

"That also is my victim! in his murder my crimes are con- 
summated; the miserable genius of my being is wound to its 
close! Oh, Frankenstein I generous and self-devoted being! What 
does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? 1, who irretrievably 
destroyed thee by destroying all that thou lovedst. Alas ! he is cold, 
he cannot answer me. . . . When 1 run over the frightful catalogue 
of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose 
thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions 
of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the 
fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of 
God and man had friends and associates in his desolation ; I am 
alone." 

Robbed of its romantic form, there is nothing unreal in this 
psychology, and it is unnecessary to search out pirates or Vandal 
kings in order to find parallels* To an English visitor, the ex-Kaiser, 
at Doom, lamented that the English no longer loved him. Or. Bun, 
in his book on the juvenile delinquent, mentions a boy of seven 
who drowned another boy to the Regent's Canal. His reason was 
that neither his family nor his contemporaries showed him affec- 
tion. Dr. Btut was kind to him, and he became a respectable 



THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 

citizen; but no Dr. Burt undertook the reformation of Franken- 
stein's monster. 

It is not the psychology of the romantics that is at fault: it is 
their standard of values. They admire strong passions, of no matter 
what kind, and whatever may be their social consequences. 
Romantic love, especially when unfortunate, is strong enough to 
win their approval, but most of the strongest passions are des- 
tructive hate and resentment and jealousy, remorse and despair, 
outraged pride and the fury of the unjustly oppressed, martial 
ardour and contempt for slaves and cowards. Hence the type of 
man encouraged by romanticism, especially of the Byronic variety, 
is violent and anti-social, an anarchic rebel or a conquering tyrant. 

This outlook makes an appeal for which the reasons lie very 
deep in human nature and human circumstances. By self-interest 
Man has become gregarious, but in instinct he has remained to 
a great extent solitary; hence the need of religion and morality to 
reinforce self-interest. But the habit of foregoing present satis- 
factions for the sake of future advantages is irksome, and when 
passions are roused the prudent restraints of social behaviour 
become difficult to endure. Those who, at such times, throw them 
off, acquire a new energy and sense of power from the cessation 
of inner conflict, and, though they may come to disaster in the 
end, enjoy meanwhile a sense of godlike exaltation which, though 
known to the great mystics, can never be experienced by a merely 
pedestrian virtue. The solitary part of their nature reasserts itself, 
but if the intellect survives the reassertion must clothe itself in 
myth. The mystic becomes one with God* and in the contem- 
plation of the Infinite feels himself absolved from duty to his 
neighbour. The anarchic rebel does even better: he feels himself 
not one with God, but God. Truth and duty, which represent our 
subjection to matter and to our neighbours, exist no longer for the 
man who has become God ; for others, truth is what he posits, duty 
what he commands. If we could all live solitary and without Jabour, 
we could all enjoy this ecstasy of independence; since we cannot, 
its delights are only available to madmen and dictators. 

Revolt of solitary instincts against social bonds is the key to the 
philosophy, the politics, and the segments, not only of what is 
commonly called the romantic movement, but of its progeny down 
to the present day. Philosophy, under the influence of German 
idealism, became solipststic, and self-development was proclaimed 

TO? 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as the fundamental principle of ethics. As regards sentiment, there 
has to be a distasteful compromise between the search for isolation 
and the necessities of passion and economics. D. H. Lawrence's 
story, "The Man Who Loved Islands/' has a hero who disdained 
such compromise to a gradually increasing extent and at last died 
of hunger and cold, but in the enjoyment of complete isolation; 
but this degree of consistency has not been achieved by the writers 
who praise solitude. The comforts of civilized life are not obtain- 
able by a hermit, and a man who wishes to write books or produce 
works of an must submit to the ministrations of others if he is to 
survive while he does his work. In order to continue to feel solitary*, 
he must be able to prevent those who serve him from impinging 
upon his ego, which is best accomplished if they are slaves. Pas- 
sionate love, however, is a more difficult matter. So long as pas- 
sionate lovers are regarded as in revolt against social trammels, 
they are admired; but in real life the love-relation itself quickly 
becomes a social trammel, and the partner in love comes to be 
hated, all the more vehemently if the love is strong enough to 
make the bond difficult to break. Hence love comes to be conceived 
as a battle, in which each is attempting to destroy the other by 
breaking through the protecting walls of his or her ego. This point 
of view has become familiar through the writings of Strindberg, 
and, still more, of D. H. Lawrence. 

Not only passionate love, but every friendly relation to others, 
is only possible, to this way of feeling, in so far as the others can 
be regarded as a projection of one's own Self. This is feasible if 
the others are blood-relations, and the more nearly they are related 
the more easily it is possible. Hence an emphasis on race, leading, 
as in the case of the Ptolemys, to endogamy. How this affected 
Byron, we know; Wagner suggests a similar sentiment in the love 
of Siegmund and Sieglinde. Nietzsche, though not scandalously, 
preferred his sister to all other women: "How strongly I feel," he 
writes^to her, "in all that you say and do, that we belong to the 
same stock. You understand more of me than others do, because 
we come of *the same parentage. This fits in very well with my 
'philosophy.' " 

The principle of nationality, of which Byron was a protagonist, 
is an extension of the same "philosophy." A nation is assumed to 
be a race, descended from common ancestors, and sharing some 
kind of "btood-consciousncts/* Mazztni, who constantly found 



THE ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 

fault with the English for their failure to appreciate Byron, con- 
ceived nations as possessed of a mystical individuality, and attri- 
buted to them the kind of anarchic greatness that other romantics 
sought in heroic men. Liberty, for nations, came to be regarded, 
not only by Mazzini, but by comparatively sober statesmen, as 
something absolute, which, in practice, made international co- 
operation impossible. 

Belief in blood and race is naturally associated t with anti- 
semitism. At the same time, the romantic outlook, partly because 
it is aristocratic, and partly because it prefers passion to calcula- 
tion, has a vehement contempt for commerce and finance. It is 
thus led to proclaim an opposition to capitalism which is quite 
different from that of the socialist who represents the interest of 
the proletariat, since it is an opposition based on dislike of 
economic preoccupations, and strengthened by the suggestion that 
the capitalist world is governed by Jews. This point of view is 
expressed by Byron on the rare occasions when he condescends 
to notice anything so vulgar as economic power: 

Who hold the balance of the world ? Who reign 
O'er conquerors, whether royalist or liberal ? 

Who rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain ? 
(That make old Europe's journals squeak and gibber all.) 

Who keep the world, both Old and New, in pain 
Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all? 

The shade of Buonaparte's noble daring? 

Jew Rothschild, and his fellow Christian Baring. 

The verse is perhaps not very musical, but the sentiment is 
quite of our time, and has been re-echoed by all Byron's followers. 

The romantic movement, in its essence, aimed at liberating 
human personality from the fetters of social convention and social 
morality. In part, these fetters were a mere useless hindrance to 
desirable forms of activity, for every ancient community has de- 
veloped rules of behaviour for which there is nothing to4>e said 
except that they are traditional. But egoistic passions, when once 
let loose, are not easily brought again into subjection to the needs 
of society. Christianity has succeeded, to some extent, in taming 
the Ego, but economic, political, andWntellectual causes stimulated 
revolt against the Churches, and the romantic movement brought 
the revolt into the sphere of morals. By encouraging a new lawless 
Ego it made social co-operation impossible, and left its disciples 

709 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

faced with the alternative of anarchy or despotism. Egoism, at first, 
made men expect from others a parental tenderness; but when 
they discovered, with indignation, that others had their own Ego, 
the disappointed desire for tenderness turned to hatred and 
violence. Man is not a solitary animal, and so long as social life 
survives, self-realization cannot be the supreme principle of ethics. 



710 



Chapter XIX 
ROUSSEAU 



JACQUES ROUSSEAU (1712-78), though a pkUosophe in 
the eighteenth-century French sense, was not what would 

^ now be called a "philosopher." Nevertheless he had a 

Swerful influence on philosophy, as on literature and taste 
and manners and politics. Whatever may be our opinion of his 
merits as a thinker, we must recognize his immense importance 
as a social force. This importance pame mainly from his appeal 
to the heart, and to what, in his day, was called "sensibility." He 
is the father of the romantic movement, the initiator of systems of 
thought which infer non-human facts from human emotions, and 
the inventor of the political philosophy of pseudo-democratic 
dictatorships as opposed to traditional absolute monarchies. Ever 
since his time, those who considered themselves reformers have 
been divided into two groups, those who followed him and those 
who followed Locke. Sometimes they co-operated, and many 
individuals saw no incompatibility. But gradually the incompati- 
bility has become increasingly evident. At the present time, 
Hitler is an outcome of Rousseau; Roosevelt and Churchill, of 
Locke. 

Rousseau's biography was related by himself in his Confessions 
in great detail, but without any slavish regard for truth. He enjoyed 
making himself out a great sinner, and sometimes exaggerated in 
this respect ; but there is abundant external evidence that he was 
destitute of all the ordinary virtues. This did not trouble him, 
because he considered that he always had a warm heart, which, 
however, never hindered him from base actions towards his best 
friends. I shall relate only so much of his life as is necessary in 
order to understand his thought and his influence. , 

He was born in Geneva, and educated as an orthodox Calvinist. 
His father, who was poor, combined the professions of watch- 
maker and dancing- master ; his mother died when 1 
and he was brought up by an aunt^He left 
twelve, and was apprenticed to various tradesy 
and at the age of sixteen fled from Geneva 
mean* of subsistence, he went to a Catholic 

711 




WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

himself as wishing to be converted. The formal conversion took 
place at Turin, in an institution for catechumens; the process 
lasted nine days. He represents his motives as wholly mercenary: 
"1 could not dissemble from myself that the holy deed I was about 
to do was at bottom the act of a bandit." But this ws written after 
he had reverted to Protestantism, and there is reason to think that 
for some years he was a sincerely believing Catholic. In 1742 he 
testified that a house in which he was living in 1730 had been 
miraculously saved from a fire by a bishop's prayers. 

Having been turned out of the institution at Turin with twenty 
francs in his pocket, he became lackey to a lady named Madame 
de Vercelli, who died three months later. At her death, he was 
found to be in possession of a ribbon which had belonged to her, 
which in fact he had stolen. He asserted that it had been given him 
by a certain maid, whom he liked ; his assertion was believed, and 
she was punished. His excuse is odd: "Never was wickedness 
further from me than at this cruel moment; and when I accused 
the poor girl, it is contradictory and yet it is true that my affection 
for her was the cause of what I did. She was present to my mind, 
and I threw the blame from myself on the first object that pre- 
sented itself." This is a good example of the way in which, in 
Rousseau's ethic, "sensibility" took the place of all the ordinary 
virtues. 

After this incident, he was befriended by Madame de Warens, 
a convert from Protestantism like himself, a charming lady who 
enjoyed a pension from the king of Savoy in consideration of her 
services to religion. For nine or ten years, most of his time was 
spent in her house; he called her "maman" even after she became 
his mistress. For a while he shared her with her factotum ; all lived 
in the greatest amity, and when the factotum died Rousseau felt 
grief, but consoled himself with the thought: "Well, at any rate 
I shall get his clothes." 

During his early years there were various periods which he spent 
as a vagabond, travelling on foot, and picking up a precarious 
livelihood as bait he could. During one of these interludes, a friend, 
with whom he was travelling, had an epileptic fit in the streets of 
Lyons; Rousseau profited by, the crowd which gathered to abandon 
his friend in the middle of the fit. On another occasion he became 
secretary to a man who represented himself as an archimandrite 
on the way to the Holy Sepulchre; on yet another, he had an affair 



ROUSSEAU 

with a rich lady, by masquerading as a Scotch Jacobite named 
Dudding. 

However, in 1743, through the help of a great lady, he became 
secretary to the French Ambassador to Venice, a sot named 
Montaigu, wht> left the work to Rousseau but neglected to pay his 
salary. Rousseau did the work well, and the inevitable quarrel was 
not his fault. He went to Paris to try to obtain justice; everybody 
admitted that he was in the right, but for a long time nothing was 
done. The vexations of this delay had something to do with turning 
Rousseau against the existing form of government in France, 
although, in the end, he received the arrears of salary that were 
due to him. 

It was at about this time (1745) that he took up with Therese le 
Yasseur, who was a servant at his hotel in Paris. He lived with her 
for the rest of his life (not to the exclusion of other affairs) ; he had 
five children by her, all of whom he took to the Foundling Hos- 
pital. No one has ever understood what attracted him to her. She 
was ugly and ignorant ; she could neither read nor write (he taught 
her to write, but not to read) ; she did not know the names of the 
months, and could not add up money. Her mother was grasping 
and avaricious ; the two together used Rousseau and all his friends as 
sources of income. Rousseau asserts (truly or falsely) that he never 
had a spark of love for Therese ; in later years she drank, and ran 
after stable-boys. Probably he liked the feeling that he was in- 
dubitably superior to her, both financially and intellectually, and 
that she was completely dependent upon him. He was always 
uncomfortable in the company of the great, and genuinely pre- 
ferred simple people; in this respect his democratic feeling was 
wholly sincere. Although he never married her, he treated her 
almost as a wife, and all the grand ladies who befriended him had 
to put up with her. 

His first literary success came to him rather late in life. The 
Academy of Dijon offered a prize for the best essay on tht ques- 
tion: Have the arts and sciences conferred benefits on mankind? 
Rousseau maintained the negative, and won the prize (1750). He 
contended that science, letters, and the arts are the worst enemies 
of morals, and, by creating wants, art the sources of slavery; for 
how can chains be imposed on those who go naked, like American 
tvages? As might be expected, he is for Sparta, and against Athens. 
He had read Plutarch's Lives at the age of seven, and been much 

7'3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

influenced by them ; he admired particularly the life of Lycurgus. 
Like the Spartans, he took success in war as the test of merit ; 
nevertheless, he admired the "noble savage," whom sophisticated 
Europeans could defeat in war. Science and virtue, he held, are 
incompatible, and all sciences have an ignoble origin. Astronomy 
comes from the superstition of astrology ; eloquence from ambi- 
tion ; geometry from avarice ; physics from vain curiosity ; and even 
ethics has its source in human pride. Education and the art of 
printing are to be deplored ; everything that distinguishes civilized 
man from the untutored barbarian is evil. 

Having won the prize and achieved sudden fame by this essay, 
Rousseau took to living according to its maxims. He adopted the 
simple life, and sold his watch, saying that he would no longer 
need to know the time. 

The ideas of the first essay were elaborated in a second/ a 
"Discourse on Inequality" (1754), which, however, failed to win 
a prize. He held that "man is naturally good, and only by 
institutions is he made bad" the antithesis of the doctrine of 
original sin and salvation through the Church. Like most political 
theorists of his age, he spoke of a state of nature, though somewhat 
hypotheticaliy, as "a state which exists no longer, perhaps never 
existed, probably never will exist, and of which none the less it is 
necessary to have just ideas, n order to judge well our present 
state." Natural law should be deduced from the state of nature, 
but as long as we are ignorant of natural man it is impossible to 
determine the law originally prescribed or best suited to him. All 
we can know is that the wills of those subject to it must be con- 
scious of their submission, and it must come directly from the 
voice of nature. He does not object to natural inequality, in respect 
of age, health, intelligence, etc., but only to inequality resulting 
from privileges authorized by convention. 

The origin of civiJ society and of the consequent social inequali- 
ties is to be found in private property. "The first man who, having 
enclosed a piece of land, bethought himself of saying 'this is mine,' 
and found people simple enough to believe htm, was the real 
founder of civil society/' He goes on to say that a deplorable 
revolution introduced metallurgy and agriculture; grain if the 
symbol of our misfortune. Europe is the unhappiest Continent, 
because it has the most grain and the most iron. To undo the 
vil, it it only necessary to abandon civilization, for man is natur- 

7'4 



ROUSSEAU 

ally good, and savage man, when he has dined, is at peace with all 
nature and the friend of all his fellow-creatures (my italics). 

Rousseau sent this essay to Voltaire, who replied (1755): "I have 
received your new book against the human race, and thank you 
for it. Never .was such a cleverness used in the design of making 
us all stupid. One longs, in reading your book, to walk on all 
fours. But as I have lost that habit for more than sixty years, I feel 
unhappily the impossibility of resuming it. Nor can I embark in 
search of the savages of Canada, because the maladies to which 
I am condemned render a European surgeon necessary to me; 
because war is going on in those regions; and because the example 
of our actions has made the savages nearly as bad as ourselves." 

It is not surprising that Rousseau and Voltaire ultimately quar- 
relled; the marvel is that they did not quarrel sooner. 

In 2754, having become famous, he was remembered by his 
native city, and invited to visit it. He accepted, but as only Cal- 
vinists could be citizens of Geneva, he had himself reconverted 
to his original faith. I ie had already adopted the practice of speaking 
of himself as a Genevan puritan and republican, and after his 
reconversion he thought of living in Geneva. He dedicated bis 
Discourse on Inequality to the City Fathers, but they were not 
pleased; they had no wish to be considered only the equals of 
ordinary citizens. Their opposition was not the only drawback to 
life in Geneva ; there was another, even more grave, and this was 
that Voltaire had gone to live there. Voltaire was a writer of plays 
and an enthusiast for the theatre, but Geneva, on puritan grounds, 
forbade all dramatic representations. When Voltaire tried to get 
die ban removed, Rousseau entered the lists on the Puritan side. 
Savages never act plays ; Plato disapproves of them ; the Catholic 
Church refuses to marry or bury actors ; Bossuet calls the drama 
a "school of concupiscence." The opportunity for an attack on 
Voltaire was too good to be lost, and Rousseau made himself the 
champion of ascetic virtue. , 

This was not the first public disagreement of these two eminent 
men* The first was occasioned by the earthquake of Lisbon (1755), 
about which Voltaire wrote a poem throwing doubt on the Provi- 
dential government of the world. Rousseau was indignant. He 
commented: "Voltaire, in seeming always to believe in God, never 
really believed in anybody but the devil, since his pretended God 
is * maleficent Being who according to him finds all his pleasure 

75 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

in working mischief. The absurdity of this doctrine is especially 
revolting in a man crowned with good things of every sort, and 
who from the midst of his own happiness tries to fill his fellow- 
creatures with despair, by the cruel and terrible image of the 
serious calamities from which he is himself free." H 

Rousseau, for his part, saw no occasion to make such a fuss 
about the earthquake. It is quite a good thing that a certain number 
of people should get killed now and then. Besides, the people of 
Lisbon suffered because they lived in houses seven stories high ; 
if they had been dispersed in the woods, as people ought to be, 
they would have escaped uninjured. 

The questions of the theology of earthquakes and of the morality 
of stage plays caused a bitter enmity between Voltaire and 
Rousseau, in which all the philosopher took sides. Voltaire 
treated Rousseau as a mischievous madman; Rousseau spoke of 
Voltaire as "that trumpet of impiety, that fine genius, and that 
low soul." Fine sentiments, however, must find expression, and 
Rousseau wrote to Voltaire (1760): "I hate you, in fact, since you 
have so willed it ; but I hate you like a man still worthier to have 
loved you, if you had willed it. Of all the sentiments with which 
my heart was full towards you, there only remain the admiration 
that we cannot refuse to your fine genius, and love for your 
writings. If there is nothing in you that I can honour but your 
talents, that is no fault of mine." 

We come now to the most fruitful period of Rousseau's life. liis 
novel La noweUe Heloite appeared in 1760; EmiU and The Social 
Contract both in 1762. Emile, which is a treatise on education 
according to "natural" principles, might have been considered 
harmless by the authorities if it had not contained "The Confession 
of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar," which set forth the principles of 
natural religion as understood by Rousseau, and was irritating to 
both Catholic and Protestant orthodoxy. The Social Contract was 
even more dangerous, for it advocated democracy and denied the 
divine right of kings. The two books, while they greatly increased 
hit feme, brought upon him a storm of official condemnation. He 
was obliged to fly from France ; Geneva would have none of him ;> 

1 The Council of Geneva ordtfrtd the two books to be burnt, and gave 
instniction* that Rousseau was to be arrested if he came to Geneva. The 
French Government had ordered his wrest: the Sorbonne and the 
Pariement of Paris condemned Wb. 

716 



ROUSSEAU 

Bern refused him asylum. At last Frederick the Great took pity 
on him, and allowed him to live at Motiers, near Neuchatel, which 
was part of the philosopher-king's dominions. There he lived for 
three years; but at the end of that time (1765) the villagers of 
Motiers, led by the pastor, accused him of poisoning, and tried 
to murder him. He fled to England, where Hume, in 1762, had 
proffered his services. 

In England, at first, all went well. He had a great social success, 
and George HI granted him a pension. He saw Burke almost daily, 
but their friendship soon cooled to the point where Burke said: 
"He entertained no principle, either to influence his heart, or 
guide his understanding, but vanity." Hume was longest faithful, 
saying he loved him much, and could live with him all his life in 
mutual friendship and esteem. But by this time Rousseau, not 
unnaturally, had come to suffer from the persecution mania which 
ultimately drove him insane, and he suspected Hume of being the 
agent of plots against his life. At moments he would realize the 
absurdity of such suspicions, and would embrace Hume, exclaim- 
ing "No, no, Hume is no traitor," to which Hume (no doubt much 
embarrassed) replied, "Quai, man cher Monsieur!" But in the 
end his delusions won the day and he fled. His last years were 
spent in Paris in great poverty, and when he died suicide was 
suspected. 

After the breach, Hume said: "He has only felt during the whole 
course of his life, and in this respect his sensibility rises to a pitch 
beyond what I have seen any example of; but it still gives him 
a more acute feeling of pain than of pleasure. He is like a man who 
was stripped not only of his clothes, but of his skin, and turned 
out in this situation to combat with the rude and boisterous 
elements/' 

This is the kindest summary of his character that is in any 
degree compatible with truth. 

There is much in Rousseau's work which, however important 
in other respects, does not concern the history of philosophical 
thought. There are only two pans of his thinking that I shall 
consider in any detail; these are, first, his theology, and second, 
his political theory. , 

in theology he made an innovation which has now been accepted 
by the great majority of Protestant theologians. Before him, every 
philosopher from Plato onwards, if he believed in God, offered 

7*7 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

intellectual arguments in favour of his belief. 1 The arguments may 
not, to us, seem very convincing, and we may feel that they would 
not have seemed cogent to anyone who did not already fed sure 
of the truth of the conclusion. But the philosopher who advanced 
the arguments certainly believed them to be logically valid, and 
such as should cause certainty of God's existence in any unpre- 
judiced person of sufficient philosophical capacity. Modern Protes- 
tants who urge us to believe in God, for the most pan, despise 
the old "proofs," and base their faith upon some aspect of human 
nature emotions of awe or mystery, the sense of right and wrong, 
the feeling of aspiration, and so on. This way of defending religious 
belief was invented by Rousseau. It has become so familiar that 
his originality may easily not be appreciated by a modern reader, 
unless he will take the trouble to compare Rousseau with (say) 
Descartes or Leibniz. 

"Ah, Madame I" Rousseau writes to an aristocratic lady, "some- 
times in the privacy of my study, with my hands pressed tight over 
my eyes or in the darkness of the night, I am of opinion that there 
is no God. But look yonder: the rising of the sun, as it scatters the 
mists that cover the earth, and lays bare the wondrous glittering 
scene of nature, disperses at the same moment all cloud from my 
soul. I find my faith again, and my God, and my belief in Him. 
I admire and adore Him, and I prostrate myself in His presence." 
On another occasion he says: "I believe in God as strongly as 
I believe any other truth, because believing and not believing are 
the last things in the world that depend on me." This form of 
argument his the drawback of being private ; the fact that Rousseau 
cannot help believing something affords no ground for another 
person to believe the same thing. 

He was very emphatic in his theism. On one occasion he 
threatened to leave a dinner party because Saint Lambert (one of 
the guests, expressed a doubt as to the existence of God. "A/at, 
Momjfur" Rousseau exclaimed angrily, 4 > crou en Ditu!" 
Robespierre, in all things his faithful disciple, followed him in 
this respect also. The "Ffte de 1'Etre Suprtme" would have bad 
Rousseau's whole-hearted approval. 

"The Confession of Fa^h of a Savoyard Vicar," which is 
an interlude in the fourth book of Entile, is the most explicit 

1 We mutt except Ptecml. "The heart has its reason*, of which 
~ ifDomu** is quite in HOUMCMI'S tyle. 



ROUSSEAU 

and formal statement of Rousseau's creed. Although it professes 
to be what the voice of nature has proclaimed to a virtuous priest, 
who suffers disgrace for the wholly "natural" fault of seducing 
an unmarried woman, 1 the reader finds with surprise that the voice 
of nature, when it begins to speak, is uttering a hotch-pot of 
arguments derived from Aristotle, St. Augustine, Descartes, and 
so on. It is true that they are robbed of precision and logical form ; 
this is supposed to excuse them, and to permit the worthy Vicar 
to say that he cares nothing for the wisdom of the philosophers. 

The later parts of "The Confession of Faith" are less reminis- 
cent of previous thinkers than the earlier parts. After satisfying 
himself that there is a God, the Vicar goes on to consider rules of 
conduct. "I do not deduce these rules," he says, "from the prin- 
ciples of a high philosophy, but I find them in the depths of my 
heart, written by Nature in ineffaceable characters." From this he 
goes on to develop the view that conscience is in all circumstances 
an infallible guide to right action. "Thanks be to Heaven," he 
concludes this part of his argument, "we are thus freed from all 
this terrifying apparatus of philosophy; we can be men without 
being learned; dispensed from wasting our life in the study of 
morals, we have at less cost a more assured guide in this immense 
labyrinth of human opinions." Our natural feelings, he contends, 
lead us to serve the common interest, while our reason urges 
selfishness. We have therefore only to follow feeling rather than 
reason in order to be virtuous. 

Natural religion, as the Vicar calls his doctrine, has no need of 
a revelation ; if men had listened to what God says to the heart, 
there would have been only one religion in the world. If God has 
revealed Himself specially to certain men, this can only be known 
by human testimony, which is fallible. Natural religion has the 
advantage of being revealed directly to each individual. 

There is a curious passage about hell. The Vicar does not know 
whether the wicked go to eternal torment, and says, sonewhat 
loftily, that the fate of the wicked does not greatly interest him; 
but on the whole he inclines to the view that the pains of hell are 
not everlasting. However this may be, he is sure that salvation is 
not confined to the members of anyone Church. 

It was presumably the rejection of revelation and of hell that so 

1 "Un prttre en bonne rfcglc ne doit fair* dei enfants qu'aux feraraes 
marifea," he ebewhew reports a Savoyard priest a saying. 

719 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

profoundly shocked the French government and the Council of 
Geneva. 

The rejection of reason in favour of the heart was not, to my 
mind, an advance. In fact, no one thought of this device so long 
as reason appeared to be on the side of religious bdief. In Rous- 
seau's environment, reason, as represented by Voltaire, was op- 
posed to religion, therefore away with reason! Moreover reason 
was abstruse and difficult; the savage, even when he has dined, 
cannot understand the ontological argument, and yet the savage 
is the repository of all necessary wisdom. Rousseau's savage who 
was not the savage known to anthropologists was a good husband 
and a kind father; he was destitute of greed, and had a religion of 
natural kindliness. He was a convenient person, but if he could 
follow the good Vicar's reasons for believing in God he must have 
had more philosophy than his innocent naivete would lead one 
to expect. 

Apart from the fictitious character of Rousseau's "natural man," 
there are two objections to the practice of basing beliefs as to 
objective fact upon the emotions of the heart. One is that there is 
no reason whatever to suppose that such beliefs will be true; the 
other is, that the resulting beliefs will be private, since the heart 
says different things to different people. Some savages are per- 
suaded by the "natural light" that it is their duty to eat people, 
and even Voltaire's savages, who are led by the voice of reason 
to hold that one should only eat Jesuits, are not wholly satisfactory. 
To Buddhists, the light of nature does not reveal the existence of 
God, but does proclaim that it is wrong to eat the flesh of animals. 
But even. if the heart said the same thing to all men, that could 
afford no evidence for the existence of anything outside our own 
emotions. However ardently I, or all mankind, may desire some- 
thing, however necessary it may be to human happiness, that is 
no ground for supposing this something to exist. There is no law 
of nature guaranteeing that mankind should be happy. Everybody 
can see that this is true of our life here on earth, but by a curious 
twist our very sufferings in this life are made into an argu- 
ment for a better life hereafter. We should not employ such 
an argument in any other connection. If you had bought ten 
dozen eggs from a man, and the first dozen were all rotten, 
you would not infer that the remaining nine dozen must be of 
surpassing excellence; yet that is the kind of reasoning that 

720 



ROUSSEAU 

"the heart" encourages as a consolation for our sufferings here 
below. 

For my part, I prefer the ontological argument, the cosmological 
argument, and the rest of the old stock-in-trade, to the sentimental 
illogicality that has sprung from Rousseau. The old arguments at 
least were honest: if valid, they proved their point; if invalid, it 
was open to any critic to prove them so. But the new theology of 
the heart dispenses with argument; it cannot be refuted, because 
it does not profess to prove its points. At bottom, the only reason 
offered for its acceptance is that it allows us to indulge in pleasant 
dreams. This is an unworthy reason, and if I had to choose 
between Thomas Aquinas and Rousseau, I should unhesitatingly 
choose the Saint. 

Rousseau's political theory is set forth in his Social Contract, 
published in 1762. This book is very different in character from 
most of his writing; it contains little sentimentality and much dose 
intellectual reasoning. Its doctrines, though they pay lip-service 
to democracy, tend to the justification of the totalitarian State. 
But Geneva and antiquity combined to make him prefer the City 
State to large empires such as those of France and England. On 
the tide-page he calls himself "citizen of Geneva," and in his 
introductory sentences he says: "As I was born a citizen of a free 
State, and a member of the Sovereign, I feel that, however feeble 
the influence of my voice may have been on public affairs, the right 
of voting on them makes it my duty to study them." There are 
frequent laudatory references to Sparta, as it appears in Plutarch's 
Life of Lycurgus. He says that democracy is best in small States, 
aristocracy in middle-sized ones, and monarchy in large ones. But 
it is to be understood that, in his opinion, small States are pre- 
ferable, in pan because they make democracy more practicable. 
When he speaks of democracy, he means, as the Greeks meant, 
direct participation of every citizen; representative government 
he calls "elective aristocracy." Since the former is no possible 
in a large State, his praise of democracy always implies praise of 
the City State. This love of the City State is, in my opinion, not 
sufficiently emphasized in most accounts of Rousseau's political 
philosophy. 

Although the book as a whole is much less rhetorical than mosft 
of Rousseau's writing, the first chapter opens with a very forceful 
piece of rhetoric; "Man is born free, and everywhere he is in 

721 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

chains. One man thinks himself the master of others, but remains 
more of a slave than they are." Liberty is the nominal goal of 
Rousseau's thought, but in fact it is equality that he values, and 
that he seeks to secure even at the expense of liberty. 

His conception of the Social Contract seems, at first, analogous 
to Locke's, but soon shows itself more akin to that of Hobbes. In 
the development from the state of nature, there comes a time when 
individuals can no longer maintain themselves in primitive inde- 
pendence; it then becomes necessary to self-preservation that they 
should unite to form a society. But how can I pledge my liberty 
without harming my interests? "The problem is to find a form 
of association which will defend and protect with the whole com- 
mon force the person and goods of each associate, and in which 
each, while uniting himself with all, may still obey himself alone, 
and remain as free as before. This is the fundamental problem 
of which the Social Contract provides the solution." 

The Contract consists in "the total alienation of each associate, 
together with all his rights, to the whole community ; for, in the 
first place, as each gives himself absolutely, the conditions are the 
same for all; and this being so, no one has any interest in making 
them burdensome to others." The alienation is to be without 
reserve: "If individuals retained certain rights, as there would be 
no common superior to decide between them and the public, each, 
being on one point his own judge, would ask to be so on all; the 
state of nature would thus continue, and the association would 
necessarily become inoperative or tyrannical." 

This implies a complete abrogation of liberty and a complete 
rejection of the doctrine of the rights of man. It is true that, in a 
later chapter, there is some softening of this theory. It is there said 
that, although the social contract gives the body politic absolute 
power over all its members, nevertheless human beings have 
natural rights as men. "The sovereign cannot impose upon its 
subjects any fetters that are useless to the community, nor can 
it even wish to do so." But the sovereign is the sole judge of what 
is useful or useless to the community. It is dear that only a very 
feeble obstacle is thus opposed to collective tyranny. 

It should be observed that the "sovereign" means, in Rousseau, 
not the monarch or the government, but the community in its 
collective and legislative capacity. 

The Social Contract can be stated in the following words: "Each 

7" 



ROUSSEAU 

of us puts his person and all his power in common under the 
supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate 
capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible pan of the 
whole/ 1 This act of association creates a moral and collective 
body, which is called the "State** when passive, the "Sovereign" 
when active, and a 'Tower 9 * in relation to other bodies like itself. 

The conception of the "general will," which appears in the 
above wording of the Contract, plays a very important part in 
Rousseau's system. I shall have more to say about it shortly. 

It is argued that the Sovereign need give no guarantees to its 
subjects, for, since it is formed of the individuals who compose it, 
it can have no interest contrary to theirs. "The Sovereign, merely 
by virtue of what it is, is always what it should be." This doctrine 
is misleading to the reader who does not note Rousseau's some- 
what peculiar use of terms. The Sovereign is not the government, 
which, it is admitted, may be tyrannical; the Sovereign is a more 
or less metaphysical entity, not fully embodied in any of the f isible 
organs of the State. Its impeccability, therefore, even if admitted, 
has not the practical consequences that it might be supposed to 
have. 

The will of the Sovereign, which is always right, is the "general 
will/* Each citizen, qud citizen, shares in the general will, but he 
may also, as an individual, have a particular will running counter 
to the general will. The Social Contract involves that whoever 
refuses to obey the general will shall be forced to do so. "This 
means nothing less than that he will be forced to be free.** 

This conception of being "forced to be free** is very meta- 
physical. The general will in the time of Galileo was certainly anti- 
Copernican; was Galileo "forced to be free 1 ' when the Inquisition 
compelled him to recant? Is even a malefactor "forced to be free'* 
when he is put in prison? Think of Byron's Corsair: 

O'er the glad waters of the deep blue sea, 

Our thoughts as boundless and our hearts as fjee. 

Would this man be more "free" in a dungeon? The odd thing is 
that Byron's noble pirates arc a direct outcome of Rousseau, and 
yet, in the above passage, Rousseau forgets his romanticism and 
speaks like a sophistical polkcm&n. Hegel, who owed much ty 
Rousseau, adopted hi* misuse of the word "freedom,** and defined 
it as the right to obey the police, or something not very different. 

7*3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Rousseau has not that profound respect for private property 
that characterizes Locke and his disciples. "The State, in relation 
to its members, is master of all their goods." Nor does he believe 
in division of powers, as preached by Locke and Montesquieu. 
In this respect, however, as in some others, his later detailed 
discussions do not wholly agree with his earlier general principles. 
In Book HI, chapter i, he says that the part of the Sovereign is 
limited to making laws, and that the executive, or government, is 
an intermediate body set up between the subjects and the Sovereign 
to secure their mutual correspondence. He goes on to say: "If the 
Sovereign desires to govern, or the magistrate to give laws, or 
if the subjects refuse to obey, disorder takes the place of regularity, 
and ... the State falls into despotism or anarchy." In this sentence, 
allowing for the difference of vocabulary, he seems to agree with 
Montesquieu. 

I come now to the doctrine of the general will, which is both 
important and obscure. The general mil is not identical with the 
will of the majority, or even with the will of all the citizens. It 
seems to be conceived as the will belonging to the body politic 
as such. If we take Hobbes's view, that a civil society is a person, 
we must suppose it endowed with the attributes of personality, 
including will. But then we are faced with the difficulty of deciding 
what are the visible manifestations of this will, and here Rousseau 
leaves us in the dark. We are told that the general will is always 
right and always tends to the public advantage ; but that it does 
not follow that the deliberations of the people are equally correct, 
for there is often a great deal of difference between the will of 
all and the general will. How, then, are we to know what is the 
general will? There is, in the same chapter, a son of answer: 

"If, when the people, being furnished with adequate informa- 
tion, held its deliberations, the citizens had no communication 
one with another, the grand total of the small differences would 
always give the general will, and the decision would always be 
good." * 

The conception in Rousseau's mind seems to be this: every 
man's political opinion is governed by self-interest, but self- 
interest consists of two parts, one of which is peculiar to the indi- 
vidual, while the other is common to all the members of the 
community. If the citizens have no opportunity of striking log- 
rolling bargains with each other, their individual interests, being 



ROUSSEAU 

divergent, will cancel out, and there will be left a resultant which 
will represent their common interest; this resultant is the general 
will. Perhaps Rousseau's conception might be illustrated by ter- 
restrial gravitation. Every particle in the earth attracts every other 
particle in the universe towards itself; the air above us attracts us 
upward while the ground beneath us attracts us downward. But 
all these "selfish" attractions cancel each other out in so far as 
they are divergent, and what remains is a resultant attraction 
towards the centre of the earth. This might be fancifully conceived 
as the act of the earth considered as a community, and as the 
expression of its general will. 

To say that the general will is always right is only to say that, 
since it represents what is in common among the self-interests of 
the various citizens, it must represent the largest collective satis- 
faction of self-interest possible to the community. This inter- 
pretation of Rousseau's meaning seems to accord with his words 
better than any other that I have been able to think of. 1 

In Rousseau's opinion, what interferes in practice with the 
expression of the general will is the existence of subordinate asso- 
ciations within the State. Each of these will have its own general 
mil, which may conflict with that of the community as a whole. 
"It may then be said that there are no longer as many votes as 
there are men, but only as many as there are associations." This 
leads to an important consequence: "It is therefore essential, if 
the general will is to be able to express itself, that there should be 
no partial society within the State, and that each citizen should 
think only his own thoughts: which was indeed the sublime and 
unique system established by the great Lycurgus." In a footnote, 
Rousseau supports his opinion with the authority of Machiavelli. 

Consider what such a system would involve in practice. The 
State would have to prohibit churches (except a State Church), 
political parties, trade-unions, and all other organizations of men 
with similar economic interests. The result is obviously the Cor- 
porate or Totalitarian State, in which the individual citizen is 
powerless. Rousseau seems to realize that it may be difficult to 

1 E.g., "There if often much difference between the will of all and the 
general will: the latter considers onlynhe common interest: the former 
looks to private interest, and is only a sum of particular wills: but take 
away from these tame wills the more and the less which destroy each 
other, and the general will remains as the sum of the differences." 

7*5 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

prohibit all associations, and adds, as an afterthought, that, if 
there must be subordinate associations, then the more there are 
the better, in order that they may neutralize each other. 

When, in a later pan of the book, he comes to consider govern- 
ment, he realizes that the executive is inevitably an association 
having an interest and a general will of its own, which may easily 
conflict with that of the community. He says that while the govern- 
ment of a large State needs to be stronger than that of a small 
one, there is also more need of restraining the government by 
means of the Sovereign. A member of the government has three 
wills: his personal will, the will of the government, and the 
general will. These three should form a crescendo, but usually in 
fact form a diminuendo. Again: "Everything conspires to take 
away from a man who is set in authority over others the sense of 
justice and reason." 

Thus in spite of the infallibility of the general will, which is 
"always constant, unalterable, and pure/' all the old problems of 
eluding tyranny remain. What Rousseau has to say on these 
problems is either a surreptitious repetition of Montesquieu, or 
an insistence on the supremacy of the legislature, which, if demo- 
cratic, is identical with what he calls the Sovereign. The broad 
general principles with which he starts, and which he presents 
as if they solved political problems, disappear when he condescends 
to detailed considerations, towards the solution of which they 
contribute nothing. 

The condemnation of the book by contemporary reactionaries 
leads a modern reader to expect to find in it a much more sweeping 
revolutionary doctrine than it in fact contains. We may illustrate 
this by what is said about democracy. When Rousseau uses this 
word, he means, as we have already seen, the direct democracy 
of the ancient City State. This, he points out, can never be com- 
pletely realized, because the people cannot be always assembled 
and always occupied with public affairs. "Were there a people of 
gods, their government would be democratic. So perfect a 
government is not for men.'* 

What we call democracy he calls elective aristocracy; this, he 
says, is the best of all governments, but it is not suitable to all 
Oxmtries. Hie climate must be neither very hot nor very cold ; the 
produce must not much exceed what is necessary, for, where it 
does, the evil of luxury is inevitable, and it it better that this 

7*6 



ROUSSEAU 

evil should be confined to a monarch and his Court than diffused 
throughout the population. In virtue of these limitations, a large 
field is left for despotic government. Nevertheless his advocacy of 
democracy, in spite of its limitations, was no doubt one of the 
things that* made the French Government implacably hostile 
to the book; the other, presumably, was the rejection of the 
divine right of kings, which is implied in the doctrine of the 
Social Contract as the origin of government. 

The Social Contract became the Bible of most of the leaders in 
the French Revolution, but no doubt, as is the fate of Bibles, it 
was not carefully read and was still less understood by many of 
its disciples. It reintroduced the habit of metaphysical abstractions 
among the theorists of democracy, and by its doctrine of the 
general will it made possible the mystic identification of a leader 
with his people, which has no need of confirmation by so mundane 
an apparatus as the ballot-box. Much of its philosophy could be 
appropriated by Hegel 1 in his defence of the Prussian autocracy. 
Its first-fruits in practice were the reign of Robespierre; the 
dictatorships of Russia and Germany (especially the latter) are 
in part an outcome of Rousseau's teaching. What further triumphs 
the future has to offer to his ghost I do not venture to predict. 

1 Hegel selects for special praise the distinction between the general 
will and the will of all. He says; "Rousseau would have made a sounder 
contribution towards a theory of the State, if he had always kept this 
distinction in sight" (/*oir, sec. 163). 



737 



Chapter XX 
KANT 

A. GERMAN IDEALISM IN GENERAL 

PHILOSOPHY in the eighteenth century was dominated by 
the British empiricists, of whom Locke, Berkeley, and Hume 
may be taken as the representatives. In these men there was a 
conflict, of which they themselves appear to have been unaware, 
between their temper of mind and the tendency of their theoretical 
doctrines. In their temper of mind they were socially minded 
citizens, by no means self-assertive, not unduly anxious for power, 
and in favour of a tolerant world where, within the limits of the 
criminal law, every man could do as he pleased. They were good- 
natured, men of the world, urbane and kindly. 

But while their temper was social, their theoretical philosophy 
led to subjectivism. This was not a new tendency ; it had existed 
in late antiquity, most emphatically in St. Augustine; it was 
revived in modern times by Descartes 's cogito, and reached a 
momentary culmination in Leibniz's windowless monads. Leibniz 
believed that everything in his expedience would be unchanged if 
the rest of the world were annihilated ; nevertheless he devoted 
himself to the reunion of the Catholic and Protestant Churches. 
A similar inconsistency appears in Locke; Berkeley, and Hume. 

In Locke, the inconsistency is still in the theory. We saw in an 
earlier chapter that Locke says, on the one hand: "Since the mind, 
in all its thoughts and reasonings, hath no other immediate object 
but its own ideas, which it alone does or can contemplate, it is 
evident that our knowledge is only conversant about them." 
And: "Knowledge is the perception of the agreement or dis- 
agreemertf of two ideas." Nevertheless, he maintains that we have 
three kinds of knowledge of real existence: intuitive, of our own ; 
demonstrative, of God's; and sensitive, of things present to sense. 
Simple ideas, he maintains, are "the product of things operating 
on the mind in a natural way." How he knows this, he does not 
ficplain; it certainly goes beyond "the agreement or disagreement 
of two ideas." 

Berkeley took an important step towards ending this incon- 

728 



KANT 

sistency. For him, there are only minds and their ideas; the 
physical external world is abolished. But he still failed to grasp 
all the consequences of the epistemological principles that he 
took over from Locke. If he had been completely consistent, he 
would have denied knowledge of God and of all minds except his 
own. From such denial he was held back by his feelings as a 
clergyman and as a social being. 

Hume shrank from nothing in pursuit of theoretical consistency, 
but felt no impulse to make his practice conform to his theory. 
Hume denied the Self, and threw doubt on induction and causa- 
tion. He accepted Berkeley's abolition of matter, but not the 
substitute that Berkeley offered in the form of God's ideas. It is 
true that, like Locke, he admitted no simple idea without an 
antecedent impression, and no doubt he imagined an "impression" 
as a state of mind directly caused by something external to the 
mind. But he could not admit this as a definition of "impression," 
since he questioned the notion of "cause." I doubt whether 
either he or his disciples were ever clearly aware of this problem 
as to impressions. Obviously, on his view, an "impression" 
would have to be defined by some intrinsic character distin- 
guishing it from an "idea," since it could not be defined causally. 
He could not therefore argue that impressions give knowledge 
of things external to ourselves, as had been done by Locke, and, 
in a modified form, by Berkeley. He should, therefore, have 
believed himself shut up in a sotipsistic world, and ignorant of 
everything except his own mental states and their relations. 

Hume, by his consistency, showed that empiricism, carried to 
its logical conclusion, led to results which few human beings could 
bring themselves to accept, and abolished, over the whole field 
of science, the distinction between rational belief and credulity. 
Locke had foreseen this danger. He puts into the mouth of a 
supposed critic the argument: "If knowledge consists in agree- 
ment of ideas, the enthusiast and the sober man are on^a level." 
Locke, living at a time when men had grown tired of "enthusiasm," 
found no difficulty in persuading men of the validity of his reply 
to this criticism. Rousseau, coming at a moment when people 
were, in turn, getting tired of reason, revived "enthusiasm," and, 
accepting the bankruptcy of reason, allowed the heart to decid? 
questions which the head left doubtful. From 1750 to 1794, the 
heart spoke louder and louder; at last Thermidor put an end, 

7*9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

for a time, to its ferocious pronouncements, so for at least as 
France was concerned. Under Napoleon, heart and head were 
alike sitenocd, 

In Germany, the reaction against Hume's agnosticism took a 
form far more profound and subtle than that which Rousseau 
had given to it. Kant, Fichtc, and Hegel developed a new kind 
of philosophy, intended to safeguard both knowledge and virtue 
from the subversive doctrines of the late eighteenth century. In 
Kant, and still more in Fichte, the subjectivist tendency that 
begins with Descartes was carried to new extremes ; in this respect 
there was at first no reaction against Hume. As regards sub- 
jectivism, the reaction began with Hegel, who sought, through 
his logic, to establish a new way of escape from the individual 
into the world. 

The whole of German idealism has affinities with the romantic 
movement. These are obvious in Fichte, and still more so in 
Schelling; they are least so in Hegel. 

Kant, the founder of German idealism, is not himself politically 
important, though he wrote some interesting essays on political 
subjects. Fichte and Hegel, on the other hand, both set forth 
political doctrines which had, and still have, a profound influence 
upon the course of history. Neither can be understood without a 
previous study of Kant, whom we shall consider in this chapter. 

There are certain common characteristics of the German 
idealists, which can be mentioned before embarking upon 
detail. 

The critique of knowledge, as a means of reaching philosophical 
conclusions, is emphasized by Kant and accepted by his followers. 
There is an emphasis upon mind as opposed to matter, which 
leads in the end to the assertion that only mind exists. There is 
a vehement rejection of utilitarian ethics in favour of systems 
which are held to be demonstrated by abstract philosophical 
arguments. There is a scholastic tone which is absent in the 
earlier French and English philosophers; Kant, Fichte, and 
Hegel were university professors, addressing learned audiences, 
not gentlemen of leisure addressing amateurs. Although their 
effects were in pan revolutionary, they themselves were not 
intentionally subversive; Fichte and Hegel were very definitely 
concerned in the defence of the State. The lives of all of them 
were exemplary and academic; their views on moral questions 

730 



RANT 

were strictly orthodox. They made innovations in theology, but 
they did so in the interests of religion. 
With these preliminary remarks, let us turn to the study of Kant. 

B. OUTLINE OF KANT'S PHILOSOPHY 

Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) is generally considered the greatest 
of modern philosophers. I cannot myself agree with this estimate, 
but it would be foolish not to recognize his great importance. 

Throughout his whole life, Kant lived in or near Konigsberg, 
in East Prussia. His outer life was academic and wholly uneventful, 
although he lived through the Seven Years' War (during part of 
which the Russians occupied East Prussia), the French Revolu- 
tion, and the early part of Napoleon's career. He was educated 
in the Wolfian version of Leibniz's philosophy, but wz? led to 
abandon it by two influences: Rousseau and Hume. Hume, by 
his criticism of the concept of causality, awakened him from his 
dogmatic slumbers so at least he says, but the awakening was 
only temporary, and he soon invented a soporific which enab'ed 
him to sleep again. Hume, for Kant, was an adversary to be refuted, 
but the influence of Rousseau was more profound. Kant was a 
man of such regular habits that people used to set their watches 
by him as he passed their doors on his constitutional, but on one 
occasion his time-table was disrupted for several days; this was 
when he was reading Emile. He said that he had to read Rousseau's 
books several times, because, at a first reading, the beauty of the 
style prevented him from noticing the matter. Although he had been 
brought up as a pietist, he was a Liberal both in politics and in 
theology ; he sympathized with the French Revolution until the ; 
Reign of Terror, and was a believer in democracy. His philosophy/ 
as we shall see, allowed an appeal to the heart against the cold 
dictates of theoretical reason, which might, with a little exaggera- 
tion, be regarded as a pedantic version of the Savoyard Vicar. 
His principle that every man is to be regarded as an end in himself 
is a form of the doctrine of the Rights of Man ; and his love of 
freedom is shown in his saying (about children as well as adults) 
that "there can be nothing more 4feadful than that the actions of 
a man should be subject to the will of another/' * 

Kant's early works are more concerned with science than with 
philosophy. After the earthquake of Lisbon he wrote on the theory 

73* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of earthquakes; he wrote a treatise on wind, and a short essay 
on the question whether the west wind in Europe is moist because 
it has crossed the Atlantic Ocean. Physical geography was a 
subject in which he took great interest. 

The most important of his scientific writings is his General 
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), which antici- 
pates Laplace's nebular hypothesis, and sets forth a possible origin 
of the solar system. Parts of this work have a remarkable Miltonic 
sublimity. It has the merit of inventing what proved a fruitful 
hypothesis, but it does not, as Laplace did, advance serious argu- 
ments in its favour. In parts it is purely fanciful, for instance in 
the doctrine that all planets are inhabited, and that the most 
distant planets have the best inhabitants a view to be praised 
for its terrestrial modesty, but not supported by any scientific 
grounds. 

At a time when he was more troubled by the arguments of 
sceptics than he was earlier or later, he wrote a curious work 
called Dreams of a Ghost-seer, Illustrated by the Dreams of Meta- 
physics (1766). The "ghost-seer* 1 is Swedenborg, whose mystical 
system had been presented to the world in an enormous work 
of which four copies were sold, three to unknown purchasers and 
one to Kant. Kant, half seriously and half in jest, suggests that 
Swedenborg's system, which he calls "fantastic," is perhaps no 
more so than orthodox metaphysics. He is not, however, wholly 
contemptuous of Swedenborg. His mystical side, which existed 
though it did not much appear in his writings, admired Sweden- 
borg, whom he calls "very sublime." 

Like everybody else at that time, he wrote a treatise on the 
sublime and the beautiful, Night is sublime, day is beautiful; the 
sea is sublime, the land is beautiful ; man is sublime, woman is 
beautiful ; and so on. 

The Encyclopaedia Britanmca remarks that "as he never married, 
he kept, the habits of his studious youth to old age." I wonder 
whether the author of this article was a bachelor or a married 
man. 

Kant's most important book is The Critique of Pure Reason 
j[fim edition, 1781 ; second edition, 1787). The purpose of this 
"work is to prove that, although none of our knowledge can trans- 
cend experience, it is, nevertheless, in part a priori and not 
inferred inductively from experience. The put of our knowledge 

732 



KANT 

which is a priori embraces, according to him, not only logic, but 
much that cannot be inducted in logic or deduced from it. He 
separates two distinctions which, in Leibniz, are confounded. On 
the one hand there is the distinction between "analytic" and 
"synthetic" .propositions; on the other hand, the distinction 
between "a priori" and "empirical" propositions. Something 
must be said about each of these distinctions. 

An "analytic" proposition is one in which the predicate is part 
of the subject ; for instance, "a tall man is a man," or "an equilateral 
triangle is a triangle." Such propositions follow from the law of 
contradiction ; to maintain that a tall man is not a man would be 
self-contradictory. A "synthetic" proposition is one that is not 
analytic. All the propositions that we know t only through ex- 
perience are synthetic. We cannot, by a mere analysis of concepts, 
discover such truths as "Tuesday was a wet day" or "Napoleon 
was a great general." But Kant, unlike Leibniz and all other 
previous philosophers, will not admit the converse, that all 
synthetic propositions are only known through experience. This 
brings us to the second of the above distinctions. 

An "empirical" proposition is one which we cannot know except 
by the help of sense-perception, either our own or that of some- 
one else whose testimony we accept. The facts of history and geo- 
graphy are of this sort ; so are the laws of science, whenever our 
knowledge of their truth depends on observational data. An "a 
priori" proposition, on the other hand, is one which, though it 
may be elicited by experience, is seen, when known, to have a 
basis other than experience. A child learning arithmetic may be 
helped by experiencing two marbles and two other marbles, and 
observing that altogether he is experiencing four marbles. But 
when he has grasped the general proposition "two and two are 
four" he no longer requires confirmation by instances; the pro- 
position has a certainty which induction can never give to a 
general law. All the propositions of pure mathematics aje in this 
sense a priori. 

Hume had proved that the law of causality is not analytic, and 
had inferred that we could not be certain of its truth. Kant 
accepted the view that it is synthetic, but nevertheless maintained 
that it is known a priori. He maintained that arithmetic ancf 
geometry are synthetic, but are likewise a priori. He was thus led 
to formulate his problem in these terms: 

733 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

How are synthetic judgments a priori possible? 

The answer to this question, with its consequences, constitutes 
the main theme of The Critique of Pur* Reason. 

Kant's sotetioa of the problem was one in which he felt great 
confidence. He had spent twelve years in looking for it, but took 
only a few months to write his whole long book after his theory 
had taken shape. In the preface to the first edition be says; "1 
venture to aasert that there is not a single metaphysical problem 
which has not been solved, or for the solution of which the key 
at least has not been supplied/ 1 In the preface to the second 
edition he compares himself to Copernicus, and says that he has 
effected a Copernican revolution in philosophy. 

According to Kant, the outer world causes only the matter of 
sensation, but our own mental apparatus orders this matter in 
space and time, and supplies the concepts by means of which 
we understand experience. Things in themselves, which are the 
causes of our sensations, are unknowable; they are not in space 
or time, they are not substances, nor can they be described by 
any of those other general concepts which Kant calls "categories/* 
Space and time are subjective, they are part of our apparatus of 
perception. But just because of this, we can be sure that whatever 
we experience will exhibit the characteristic* dealt with by geo- 
metry and the science of time. If you always wore blue spectacles, 
you could be sure of seeing everything blue (this is not Kant I 
illustration). Similarly, since you always wear spatial spectacles in 
your mind, you are sure of always seeing everything in space. 
Thus geometry is a priori in the sense that it must be true of 
everything experienced, but we have no reason to suppose thst 
anything analogous is true of things in themselves, which we do 
not experience* 

Space and time, Kant says, are not concepts; they are forms of 
"intuition/* (The German word is "An*chauxnf>; which means 
HteraUy^'looking at" or "view." The word "intuition." though 
the accepted translation, is not altogether a satisfactory one.) There 
are also, however, a priori concepts; these are the twelw "cate- 
gories," which Kant derives from the forms of the syllogism- The 
twelve categories are divided ipto four sets of three : ( i ) of quantity : 
unity, plurality, totality; (2) of quality: reality, negation, limita- 
tion; (3) of relation: substaiuxsand-accidem, cause-tnd-effect, 
redorocity; (4) of modality: possibility, existence, necessity. These 

734 



*ANT 

are subjective in the same sense in which space and time 
that is to say, our mental constitution is such that they are applic- 
able to whatever we experience, but there is no reason to suppose 
them applicable to things in themselves. As regards cause, however, 
there is an inconsistency, for things in themselves are regarded 
by Kant as causes of sensations, and free volitions are held by him 
to be causes of occurrences in space and time. This inconsistency 
is not an accidental oversight; it is an essential part of his system. 

A large pan of The Critique of Pure Reason is occupied in show* 
ing the fallacies that arise from applying space and time or the 
categories to things that are not experienced. When this is done, 
so Kant maintains, we find ourselves troubled by "antinomies" 
that is to say, by mutually contradictory propositions each of 
which can apparently be proved. Kant gives four such antinomies, 
each consisting of thesis and antithesis. 

In the first, the thesis says: "The world has a beginning in time, 
and is also limited as regards space." The antithesis says: "The 
world has no beginning in time, and no limits in space ; it is infinite 
as regards both time and space." 

The second antinomy proves that every composite substance 
both is, and is not, made up of simple parts. 

The thesis of the third antinomy maintains that there are two 
kinds of causality, one according to the laws of nature, the other 
4hat of freedom ; the antithesis maintains that there is only causality 
according to the laws of nature. 

The fourth antinomy proves that there is, and is not, an 
absolutely necessary Being. 

This pan of the Critique greatly influenced Hegel, whose 
dialectic proceeds wholly by way of antinomies. 

In a famous section, Kant sets to work to demolish all the 
purely intellectual proofs of the existence of God. He makes it 
clear that he has other reasons for believing in God; these he 
was to set forth later in The Critique of Practical Reason. But for 
the time being his purpose is purely negative. 

There are, he says, only three proofs of God's existence by pure 
reason; these are th ontological proof, the cosmologies! proof, 
and the physico-theological proof. 

The ontological proof, as he sets It forth, defines God as the en? 
reatimmum, the most real being; i.e. the subject of all predicates 
that belong to being absolutely. It is contended, by thoae who 

735 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

believe the proof valid, that, since "existence" is such a predicate, 
this subject must have the predicate "existence/ 1 i.e. must exist. 
Kant objects that existence is not a predicate. A hundred dialers 
that I merely imagine may, he says, have all the same predicates 
as a hundred real thalers. 

The cosmological proof says: If anything exists, then an abso- 
lutely necessary Being must exist; now I know that I exist; 
therefore an absolutely necessary Being exists, and this must be 
the ens realissimum. Kant maintains that the last step in this 
argument is the ontological argument over again, and that it is 
therefore refuted by what has been already said. 

The physico-theological proof is the familiar argument from 
design, but in a metaphysical dress. It maintains that the universe 
exhibits an order which is evidence of purpose. This argument is 
treated by Kant with respect, but he points out that, at best, it 
proves only an Architect, not a Creator, and therefore cannot give 
an adequate conception of God. He concludes that "the only 
theology of reason which is possible is that which is based upon 
moral laws or seeks guidance from them." 

God, freedom, and immortality, he says, are the three "ideas 
of reason." But although pure reason leads us to form these ideas, 
it cannot itself prove their reality. The importance of these ideas 
is practical, i.e. connected with morals. The purely intellectual 
use of reason leads to fallacies ; its only right use is directed u, 
moral ends. 

The practical use of reason is developed briefly near the end of 
The Critique of Pure Reason, and more fully in The Critique of 
Practical Reason (1786). The argument is that the moral law 
demands justice, i.e. happiness proportional to virtue. Only 
Providence can insure this, and has evidently not insured it in 
this life. Therefore there is a God and a future life; and there 
must be freedom, since otherwise there would be no such thing 
as virtue. 

Kant's ethical system, as set forth in his Metaphysic of Morals 
(1785), has considerable historical importance. This book contains 
the "categorical imperative, 1 ' which, at least fcs a phrase, is familiar 
outside the circle of professional philosophers. As might be 
'expected, Kant will have nothing to do with utilitarianism, or 
with any doctrine which gives to morality a purpose outside itself. 
He wants, he says, "a completely isolated metaphysic of morals, 

736 



KANT 

which is not mixed with any theology or physics or hyperphysics." 
All moral concepts, he continues, have their seat and origin 
wholly a priori in the reason. Moral worth exists only when a man 
acts from a sense of duty; it is not enough that the act should be 
such as duty wight have prescribed. The tradesman who is honest 
from self-interest, or the man who is kind from benevolent 
impulse, is not virtuous. The essence of morality is to be derived 
from the concept of law; for, though everything in nature acts 
according to laws, only a rational being has the power of acting 
according to the idea of a law, i.e. by Will. The idea of an objective 
principle, in so far as it is compelling to the will, is called a 
command of the reason, and the formula of the command is 
called an imperative. 

There are two sorts of imperative: the hypothetical imperative 
which says "You must do so-and-so if you wish to achieve such- 
and-such an end"; and the categorical imperative, which says that 
a certain kind of action is objectively necessary, without regard 
to any end. The categorical imperative is synthetic and a 
priori. Its character is deduced by Kant from the concept of 
Law: 

"If I think of a categorical imperative, I know at once what it 
contains. For as the imperative contains, besides the Law, only 
the necessity of the maxim to be in accordance with this law, 
out the Law contains no condition by which it is limited, nothing 
remains over but the generality of a law in general, to which the 
maxim of the action is to be conformable, and which conforming 
alone presents the imperative as necessary. Therefore the cate- 
gorical imperative is a single one, and in fact this: Act only 
according to a maxim by which you can at the same time mil that it 
shall become a general law." Or: "Act as if the maxim of your action 
were to becotne through your will a general natural law." 

Kant gives as an illustration of the working of the categorical 
imperative that it is wrong to borrow money, because jf we all 
tried to do so there would be no money left to borrow. One can 
in like manner show that theft and murder are condemned by the 
categorical imperative. But there are some acts which Kant 
would certainly think wrong but which cannot be shown to be 
wrong by his principles, for instance suicide; it would be quite^ 
possible for a melancholic to wish that everybody should commit 
suicide. His maxim seems, in fact, to give a necessary but not a 

(/ H t*t<rn /V 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sufficient criterion of virtue. To get a sufficient criterion, we should 
have to abandon Kant's purely formal point of view, and take 
some account of the effects of actions. Kant, however, states 
emphatically that virtue does not depend upon the intended 
result of an action, but only on the principle of wljich it is itself 
a result; and if this is conceded, nothing more concrete than 
his maxim is possible. 

Kant maintains, although his principle does not seem to entail 
this consequence, that we ought so to act as to treat every man 
as an end in himself. This may be regarded as an abstract form 
of the doctrine of the rights of man, and it is open to the same 
objections. If taken seriously, it would make it impassible to reach 
a decision whenever two people's interests conflict. The diffi- 
culties are particularly obvious in political philosophy, which 
requires some principle, such as preference for the majority, by 
which the interests of some can, when necessary, be sacrificed to 
those of others. If there is to be any ethic of government, the end 
of government must be one, and the only single end compatible 
with justice is the good of the community. It is possible, however, 
to interpret Kant's principle as meaning, not that each man is an 
absolute end, but that all men should count equally in deter- 
mining actions by which many are affected. So interpreted, the 
principle may be regarded as giving an ethical basis for democracy. 
In this interpretation, it is not open to the above objection. 

Kant's vigour and freshness of mind in old age are shown by 
his treatise on Perpetual Peace (1795). lathis work he advocates 
a federation of free States, bound together by a covenant for- 
bidding war. Reason, he says, utterly condemns war, which only 
an international government can prevent. The civil constitution 
of the component States should, he says, be "republican," but 
he defines this word as meaning that the executive and the legis- 
lative are separated He does not mean that there should be no 
king; in fact, he says that it is easiest to get a perfect government 
under a c monarchy. Writing under the impact of the Reign of 
Tenor, he is suspicious of democracy; he says that it is of 
necessity despotism, since it establishes an executive power. 
"The 'whole people/ so-called, who carry their measures are 
realty not all, but only a majority: so that here the universal will 
is in contradiction with itself and with the principle of freedom*' 1 
The phrasing shows the influence of Rousseau, but the important 

738 



KANT 

idea of a world federation as the way to secure peace is not derived 
from Rousseau. 

Since 1933, this treatise has caused Kant to fall into disfavour 
in his own country. 



c. KANT'S THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME 

The most important part of The Critique of Pure Reason is the 
doctrine of space and time. In this section I propose to make a 
critical examination of this doctrine. 

To explain Kant's theory of space and time clearly is not easy, 
because the theory itself is not clear. It is set forth both in The 
Critique of Pure Reason and in the Prolegomena; the latter exposi- 
tion is the easier, but is less full than that in the Critique. I will 
try first to expound the theory, making it as plausible as I can; 
only after exposition will I attempt criticism. 

Kant holds that the immediate objects of perception are due 
partly to external things and partly to our own perceptive appara- 
tus. Locke had accustomed the world to the idea that the secondary 
qualities colours, sounds, smells, etc. are subjective, and do 
not belong to the object as it is in itself. Kant, like Berkeley and 
Hume, though in not quite the same way, goes further, and makes 
the primary qualities also subjective. Kant does not at most times 
pnestion that our sensations have causes, which he calls "things- 
in-themselves" or "noumena" What appears to us in perception, 
which he calls a "phenomenon/' consists of two parts: that due 
to the object, which he calls the "sensation," and that due to our 
subjective apparatus, which, he says, causes the manifold to be 
ordered in certain relations. This latter part he calls the form of 
the phenomenon. This part is not itself sensation, and therefore 
not dependent upon the accident of environment; it is always 
the same, since we carry it about with us, and it is a priori in the 
sense that it is not dependent upon experience. A pure form of 
sensibility is called a "pure intuition" (Anschauung); there are 
two such forms, namely space and time, one for the outer sense, 
one for the inner. 

To prove that space and time are a priori forms, Kant has two 
classes of arguments, one metaphysfcal, the other epistemological v 
or, as he calls it, transcendental. The former class of arguments 
are taken directly from the nature of space and time, the latter 

739 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

indirectly from the possibility of pure mathematics. The argu- 
ments about space are given more fully than those about time, 
because it is thought that the latter are essentially the same as the 
former. 

As regards space, the metaphysical arguments are four in 
number. 

(1) Space is not an empirical concept, abstracted from outer 
experiences, for space is presupposed in referring sensations to 
something external, and external experience is only possible 
through the presentation of space. 

(2) Space is a necessary presentation a priori, which underlies 
all external perceptions; for we cannot imagine that there should 
be no space, although we can imagine that there should be nothing 
in space. 

(3) Space is not a discursive or general concept of the relations 
of things in general, for there is only one space, of which what we 
call "spaces" are parts, not instances. 

(4) Space is presented as an infinite given magnitude, which 
holds within itself all the parts of space; this relation is different 
from that of a concept to its instances, and therefore space is not 
a concept but an Anschauung. 

The transcendental argument concerning space is derived from 
geometry. Kant holds that Euclidean geometry is known a priori, 
although it is synthetic, i.e. not deducible from logic alone. Get* 
metrical proofs, he considers, depend upon the figures; we can 
see, for instance, that, given two intersecting straight lines at right 
angles to each other, only one straight line at right angles to both 
can be drawn through their point of intersection. This knowledge, 
he thinks, is not derived from experience. But the only way in 
which my intuition can anticipate what will be found in the object 
is if it contains only the form of my sensibility, antedating in my 
subjectivity all the actual impressions. The objects of sense must 
obey geometry, because geometry is concerned with our ways 
of perceiving, and therefore we cannot perceive otherwise. This 
explains why geometry, though synthetic, is a priori and apodcictic. 

The arguments with regard to time are essentially the same, 
except that arithmetic replaces geometry with the contention that 
counting takes time. 

Let us now examine these arguments one by one. 

The first of the metaphysical arguments concerning space says: 

740 



KANT 

"Space is not an empirical concept abstracted from external 
experiences. For in order that certain sensations may be referred 
to something outside me [i.e. to something in a different position 
in space from that in which I find myself], and further in order 
that I may b$ able to perceive them as outside and beside each 
other, and thus as not merely different, but in different places, 
the presentation of space must already give the foundation [zum 
Grunde Uegen}" Therefore external experience is only possible 
through the presentation of space. 

The phrase "outside me [i.e. in a different place from that in 
which I find myself] 99 is a difficult one. As a thing-in-itself, I am 
not anywhere, and nothing is spatially outside me; it is only my 
body as a phenomenon that can be meant. Thus all that is really 
involved is what comes in the second part of the sentence, namely 
that I perceive different objects as in different places. The image 
which arises in one's mind is that of a cloak-room attendant who 
hangs different coats on different pegs; the pegs must already 
exist, but the attendant's subjectivity arranges the coats. 

There is here, as throughout Kant's theory of the subjectivity 
of space and time, a difficulty which he seems to have never felt. 
What induces me to arrange objects of perception as I do rather 
than otherwise? Why, for instance, do I always see people's eyes 
above their mouths and not below them ? According to Kant, the 
<Jes and the mouth exist as things in themselves, and cause my 
separate percepts, but nothing in them correspond* to the spatial 
arrangement that exists in my perception. Contrast with this the 
physical theory of colours. We do not suppose that in matter 
there are colours in the sense in which our percepts have colours, 
but we do think that different colours correspond to different 
wave-lengths. Since waves, however, involve space and time, 
there cannot, for Kant, be waves in the causes of our percepts. If, 
on the other hand, the space and time of our percepts have 
counterparts in the world of matter, as physics assunjes, then 
geometry is applicable to these counterparts, and Kant's arguments 
fail. Kant holds that the mind orders the raw material of sensation, 
but never thinks it necessary to say why it orders it as it does and 
not otherwise. 

In regard to time this difficulty is even greater, because of the* 
intrusion of causality. I perceive the lightning before I perceive 
the thunder ; a thing-in-itself A caused my perception of lightning, 

74' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

and another thing-in-itself B caused my perception of thunder, 
but A was not earlier than B, since time exists only in the relations 
of percepts. Why, then, do the two timeless things A and B pro- 
duce effects at different times? This must be wholly arbitrary if 
Kant is right, and there must be no relation between A and B 
corresponding to the fact that the percept caused by A is earlier 
than that caused by B. 

The second metaphysical argument maintains that it is possible 
to imagine nothing in space, but impossible to imagine no space. 
It seems to me that no serious argument can be based upon 
what we can or cannot imagine ; but I should emphatically deny 
that we can imagine space with nothing in it. You can imagine 
looking at the sky on a dark cloudy night, but then you yourself 
are in space, and you imagine the clouds that you cannot see. 
Kant's space, as Vaihinger pointed out, is absolute, like Newton's, 
and not merely a system of relations. But I do not see how 
absolute empty space can be imagined. 

The third metaphysical argument says: "Space is not a dis- 
cursive, or, as is said, general concept of the relations of things in 
general, but a pure intuition. For, in the first place, we can only 
imagine [rich vonUllen] one single space, and if we speak of 
'spaces' we mean only parts of one and the same unique space. 
And these parts cannot precede the whole as its parts . . . but 
can only be thought as in if. It [space] is essentially unique, tflt 
manifold in it rests solely on limitations." From this it is concluded 
that space is an a priori intuition. 

The gist of this argument is the denial of plurality in space 
itself. What we call "spaces" are neither instances of a general 
concept "a space," nor parts of an aggregate. I do not know 
quite what, according to Kant, their logical status is, but in any 
case they are logically subsequent to space. To those who take, 
as practically all moderns do, a relational view of space, this argu- 
ment becomes incapable of being stated, since neither "space" 
nor "spaces" can survive as a substantive. 

The fourth metaphysical argument is chiefly concerned to prove 
that space is an intuition, not a concept. Its premiss is "space is 
imagined [or presented, vorgcstellt] as an infinite given magnitude." 
1 This is the view of a person* living in a flat country, like that of 
Kfinigsberg; I do not see how an inhabitant of an Alpine valley 
could adopt it. It i* difficult to see how anything infinite can be 

742 



RANT 

"given." I should have thought it obvious that the pan of space 
that is given is that which is peopled by objects of perception, and 
that for other parts we have only a feeling of possibility of motion. 
And if so vulgar an argument may be intruded, modern astronomers 
maintain that space is in fact not infinite, but goes round and 
round, like the surface of the globe. 

The transcendental (or epistemological) argument, which is 
best stated in the Prolegomena, is more definite than the meta- 
physical arguments, and is also more definitely refutable. "Geo- 
metry/' as we now know, is a name covering two different studies. 
On the one hand, there is pure geometry, which deduces conse- 
quences from axioms, without inquiring whether the axioms are 
"true"; this contains nothing that does not follow from logic, 
and is not "synthetic," and has no need of figures such as are 
used in geometrical text-books. On the other hand, there is geo- 
metry as a branch of physics, as it appears, for example, in the 
general theory of relativity ; this is an empirical science, in which 
the axioms are inferred from measurements, and are found to 
differ from Euclid's. Thus of the two kinds of geometry one is 
a priori but not synthetic, while the other is synthetic but not 
a priori. This disposes of the transcendental argument. 

Let us now try to consider the questions raised by Kant as 
regards space in a more general way. If we adopt the view, which 
If taken for granted in physics, that our percepts have external 
causes which are (in some sense) material, we are led to the con- 
clusion that all the actual qualities in percepts are different from 
those in their unperceived causes, but that there is a certain 
structural similarity between the system of percepts and the 
system of their causes. There is, for example, a correlation between 
colours (as perceived) and wave-lengths (as inferred by physicists). 
Similarly there must be a correlation between space as an ingredient 
in percepts and space as an ingredient in the system of unper- 
ceived causes of percepts. All this rests upon the maxim "same 
cause, same effect," with its obverse, "different effects,*different 
causes." Thus, e.g., when a visual percept A appears to the left 
of a visual percept B, we shall suppose that there is some corre- 
sponding relation between the cause of A and the cause of B. 

We have, on this view, two sj&ces, one subjective and on* 
objective, one known in experience and the other merely inferred. 
But there is no difference in this respect between space and other 

743 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

aspects of perception, such as colours and sounds. All alike, in 
their subjective forms, are known empirically; all alike, in their 
objective forms, are inferred by means of a maxim as to causation. 
There is no reason whatever for regarding our knowledge of space 
as in any way different from our knowledge of colour and sound 
and smell. 

With regard to time, the matter is different, since, if we adhere 
to the belief in unperceived causes of percepts, the objective time 
must be identical with the subjective time. If not, we get into the 
difficulties already considered in connection with lightning and 
thunder. Or take such a case as the following: You hear a man 
speak, you answer him, and he hears you. His speaking, and his 
hearing of your reply, are both, so far as you are concerned, in the 
unperceived world; and in that world the former precedes the 
latter. Moreover his speaking precedes your hearing in the objec- 
tive world of physics; your hearing precedes your reply in the 
subjective world of percepts; and your reply precedes his hearing 
in the objective world of physics. It is clear that the relation 
"precedes" must be the same in all these propositions. While, 
therefore, there is an important sense in which perceptual space is 
subjective, there is no sense in which perceptual time is subjective. 

The above arguments assume, as Kant does, that percepts are 
caused by "things in themselves," or, as we should say, by events 
in the world of physics. This assumption, however, is by no mea&* 
logically necessary. If it is abandoned, percepts cease to be in any 
important sense "subjective," since there is nothing with which 
to contrast them. 

The "thing-in-itself" was an awkward element in Kant's philo- 
sophy, and was abandoned by his immediate successors, who 
accordingly fell into something very like solipsism. Kant's incon- 
sistencies were such as to make it inevitable that philosophers who 
were influenced by him should develop rapidly either in the em- 
pirical or in the absolutist direction; it was, in fact, in the latter 
direction that German philosophy moved until after the death of 
Hegel. 

Kant's immediate successor, Fichtc (1762-1814), abandoned 
"things in themselves," and carried subjectivism to a point which 
%eems almost to involve a kind of insanity. He holds that the Ego 
is the only ultimate reality, and that it exists because it posits 
itself; the non-Ego, which has a subordinate reality, also exists 

744 



KANT 

only because the Ego posits it. Fichte is not important as a pure 
philosopher, but as the theoretical founder of German nationalism, 
by his Addresses to the German Nation (1807-8), which were 
intended to rouse the Germans to resistance to Napoleon after the 
battle of Jena.* The Ego as a metaphysical concept easily became 
confused with the empirical Fichte; since the Ego was German, 
it followed that the Germans were superior to all other nations. 
"To have character and to be a German," says Fichte, "un- 
doubtedly mean the same thing." On this basis he worked out 
a whole philosophy of nationalistic totalitarianism, which had 
great influence in Germany. 

His immediate successor Schelling (1775-1854) was more 
amiable, but not less subjective. He was closely associated with 
the German romantics; philosophically, though famous in his 
day, he is not important. The important development from Kant's 
philosophy was that of Hegel. 



745 



Chapter XXI 

CURRENTS OF THOUGHT 
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

E IHE intellectual life of the nineteenth century was more 
I complex than that of any previous age. This was due toi 

JL several causes. First: the area concerned was larger than 
ever before; America and Russia made important contributions, 
and Europe became more aware than formerly of Indian philo- 
sophies, both ancient and modern. Second: science, which had 
been a chief source of novelty since the seventeenth century, made 
new conquests, especially in geology, biology, and organic chemis- 
try. Third: machine production profoundly altered the social 
structure, and gave men a new conception of their powers in 
relation to the physical environment. Fourth: a profound revolt, 
both philosophical and political, against traditional systems in 
thought, in politics, and in economics, gave rise to attacks upon 
many beliefs and institutions that had hitherto been regarded as 
unassailable. This revolt had two very different forms, one roman- 
tic, the other rationalistic. (I am using these words in a liberal 
sense.) The romantic revolt passes from Byron, Schopenhauer, 
and Nietzsche to Mussolini and Hitler; the rationalistic revolt 
begins with the French philosophers of the Revolution, passes on, 
somewhat softened, to the philosophical radicals in England, 
then acquires a deeper form in Marx and issues in Soviet 
Russia. 

The intellectual predominance of Germany is a new factor, 
beginning with Kant. Leibniz, though a German, wrote almost 
always in Latin or French, and was very little influenced by 
Germany in his philosophy. German idealism after Kant, as well 
as latei German philosophy, was, on the contrary, profoundly 
influenced by German history; much of what seems strange in 
German philosophical speculation reflects the state of mind of a 
vigorous nation deprived, by historical accidents, of its natural 
share of power. Germany had owed its international position to 
the Holy Roman Empire, but the Emperor had gradually lost 
control of his nominal subjects. The last powerful Emperor was 
Charles V, and he owed his power to his possessions in Spain and 

746 



CURRENTS OF THOUGHT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

the Low Countries. The Reformation and the Thirty Years' War 
destroyed what had been left of German unity, leaving a number 
of petty principalities which were at the mercy of France. In the 
eighteenth century only one German state, Prussia, had success- 
fully resisted .the French; that is why Frederick was called the 
Great. But Prussia itself had failed to stand against Napoleon, 
being utterly defeated in the battle of Jena. The resurrection of 
Prussia under Bismarck appeared as a revival of the heroic past 
of Alaric, Charlemagne, and Barbarossa. (To Germans, Charle- 
magne is a German, not a Frenchman.) Bismarck showed his sense 
of history when he said, "We will not go to Canossa." 

Prussia, however, though politically predominant, was culturally 
less advanced than much of Western Germany; this explains why 
many eminent Germans, including Goethe, did not regret Napo- 
leon's success at Jena. Germany, at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century, presented an extraordinary cultural and economic diver- 
sity. In East Prussia serfdom still survived; the rural aristocracy 
were largely immersed in bucolic ignorance, and the labourers 
were completely without even the rudiments of education. Western 
Germany, on the other hand, had been in part subject to Rome 
in antiquity; it had been under French influence since the seven- 
teenth century; it had been occupied by French revolutionary 
armies, and had acquired institutions as liberal as those of France. 
38me of the princes were intelligent, patrons of the arts and 
sciences, imitating Renaissance princes in their courts; the most 
notable example was Weimar, where the Grand Duke was Goethe's 
patron. The princes were, naturally, for the most part opposed 
to German unity, since it would destroy their independence. They 
were therefore anti-patriotic, and so were many of the eminent 
men who depended on them, to whom Napoleon appeared the 
missionary of a higher culture than that of Germany. 

Gradually, during the nineteenth century, the culture of Protes- 
tant Germany became increasingly Prussian. Frederick tl$ Great, 
as a free-thinker and an admirer of French philosophy, had 
struggled to make Berlin a cultural centre; the Berlin Academy 
had as its perpetual President an eminent Frenchman, Maupertuis, 
who, however, unfortunately became the victim of Voltaire's 
deadly ridicule. Frederick's endeavours, like those of the other 
enlightened despots of the time, did not include economic or 
political reform; all that was really achieved was a claque of 

747 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

hired intellectuals. After his death, it was again in Western Ger- 
many that most of the men of culture were to be found. 

German philosophy was more connected with Prussia than were 
German literature and art. Kant was a subject of Frederick the 
Great; Fichte and Hegel were professors at Berlin. Kant was little 
influenced by Prussia ; indeed he got into trouble with the Prussian 
Government for his liberal theology. But both Fichte and Hegel 
were philosophic mouthpieces of Prussia, and did much to prepare 
the way for the later identification of German patriotism with 
admiration for Prussia. Their work in this respect was carried on 
by the great German historians, particularly by Mommsen and 
Treitschke. Bismarck finally persuaded the German nation to 
accept unification under Prussia, and thus gave the victory to the 
less internationally minded elements in German culture. 

Throughout the whole period after the death of Hegel, most 
academic philosophy remained traditional, and therefore not very 
important. British empiricist philosophy was dominant in England 
until near the end of the century, and in France until a somewhat 
earlier time; then, gradually, Kant and Hegel conquered the 
universities of France and England, so far as their teachers of 
technical philosophy were concerned. The general educated public, 
however, was very little affected by this movement, which had 
few adherents among men of science. The writers who carried on 
the academic tradition John Stuart Mill on the empiricist side, 
Lotze, Sigwart, Bradley, and Bosanquet on the side of German 
idealism were none of them quite in the front rank among 
philosophers, that is to say, they were not the equals of the men 
whose systems they, on the whole, adopted. Academic philosophy 
has often before been out of touch with the most vigorous thought 
of the age, for instance, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
when it was still mainly scholastic. Whenever this happens, the 
historian of philosophy is less concerned with the professors than 
with the unprofessional heretics. 

Most of the philosophers of the French Revolution combined 
science with beliefs associated with Rousseau. Helvetius and Con- 
dorcet may be regarded as typical in their combination of rational- 
ism and enthusiasm. | 

Helvetius (1715-71) had the honour of having his book De 
l y Esprit (1758) condemned by the Sorbonne and burnt by the 
hangman. Bentham read him in 1769 and immediately determined 

74* 



CURRENTS OF THOUGHT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

to devote his life to the principles of legislation, saying: "What 
Bacon was to the physical world, Helvetius was to the moral. The 
moral world has therefore had its Bacon, but its Newton is still 
to come." James Mill took Helvetius as his guide in the education 
of his son John Stuart. 

Following Locke's doctrine that the mind is a tabula rasa, 
Helvetius considered the differences between individuals entirely 
due to differences of education : in every individual, his talents and 
his virtues are the effect of his instruction. Genius, he maintains, 
is often due to chance: if Shakespeare had not been caught poach- 
ing, he would have been a wool merchant. His interest in legis- 
lation comes from the doctrine that the principal instructors of 
adolescence are the forms of government and the consequent 
manners and customs. Men are born ignorant, not stupid; they 
are made stupid by education. 

In ethics, Helvetius was a utilitarian ; he considered pleasure to 
be the good. In religion, he was a deist, and vehemently anti- 
clerical. In theory of knowledge, he adopted a simplified version 
of Locke: "Enlightened by Locke, we know that it is to the sense- 
organs we owe our ideas, and consequently our mind." Physical 
sensibility, he says, is the sole cause of our actions, our thoughts, 
our passions, and our sociability. He strongly disagrees with 
Rousseau as to the value of knowledge, which he rates very highly. 

His doctrine is optimistic, since only a perfect education is 
needed to make men perfect. There is a suggestion that it would 
be easy to find a perfect education if the priests were got out of 
the way. 

Condorcet (1743-94) has opinions similar to those of Helvetius, 
but more influenced by Rousseau. The rights of man, he says, are 
a'l deduced from this one truth, that he is a sensitive being, capable 
of making reasonings and acquiring moral ideas, from which it 
follows that men can no longer be divided into rulers and subjects, 
liars and dupes. "These principles, for which the generous Sidney 
gave his life and to which Locke attached the authority of his 
name, were afterwards developed more precisely by Rousseau/' 
Locke, he says, first showed the limits of human knowledge. His 
"method soon became that of all philosophers, and it is by applying 
it to morals, politics, and economics, that they have succeeded 
in pursuing in these sciences a road almost as sure as that of the 
natural sciences." 

74Q 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Condorcet much admires the American Revolution. "Simple 
common sense taught the inhabitants of the British Colonies that 
Englishmen born on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean had 
precisely the same rights as those born on the meridian of Green- 
wich." The United States Constitution, he says, is based on natural 
rights, and the American Revolution made the rights of man 
known to all Europe, from the Neva to the Guadalquivir. The 
principles of the French Revolution, however, are "purer, more 
precise, deeper than those that guided the Americans." These 
words were written while he was in hiding from Robespierre; 
shortly afterwards, he was caught and imprisoned. He died in 
prison, but the manner of his death is uncertain. 

He was a believer in the equality of women. He was also the 
inventor of Malthus's theory of population, which, however, had 
not for him the gloomy consequences that it had for Malthus, 
because he coupled it with the necessity of birth control. Malthus's 
father was a disciple of Condorcet, and it was in this way that 
Maltbus came to know of the theory. 

Condorcet is even more enthusiastic and optimistic than Hel- 
vetius. He believes that, through the spread of the principles of 
the French Revolution, all the major social ills will soon disappear. 
Perhaps he was fortunate in not living beyond 1794. 

The doctrines of the French revolutionary philosophers, made 
less enthusiastic and much more precise, were brought to England 4 
by the philosophical radicals, of whom Bentham was the recog- 
nized chief. Bentham was, at first, almost exclusively interested 
in law; gradually, as he grew older, his interests widened and his 
opinions became more subversive. After 1808, he was a republican, 
a believer in the equality of women, an enemy of imperialism, and 
an uncompromising democrat. Some of these opinions he owed 
to James Mill. Both believed in the omnipotence of education. 
Bentham *s adoption of the principle of "the greatest happiness of 
the greatest number" was no doubt due to democratic feeling, but 
it involved opposition to the doctrine of the rights of man, which 
be bluntly characterized as "nonsense." 

The philosophical radicals differed from men like Helvetius and 
Condorcet in many ways. Temperamentally, they were patient 
and fond of working out their theories in practical detail. They 
attached great importance to economics, which they believed 
themselves to have developed as a science. Tendencies to en* 

7SO 



CURRENTS OP THOUGHT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

thusiasm, which existed in Bentham and John Stuart Mill, but 
not in Malthus or James Mill, were severely held in check by this 
"science," and particularly by Malthus's gloomy version of the 
theory of population, according to which most wage-earners must 
always, except just after a pestilence, earn the smallest amount 
that will keep them and their families alive. Another great dif- 
ference between the Benthamites and their French predecessors 
was that in industrial England there was violent conflict between 
employers and wage-earners, which gave rise to trade- 
unionism and socialism. In this conflict the Benthamites, broadly 
speaking, sided with the employers against the working class. Their 
last representative, John Stuart Mill, however, gradually ceased 
to give adherence to his father's stern tenets, and became, as he 
grew older, less and less hostile to socialism, and less and less 
convinced of the eternal truth of classical economics. According 
to his autobiography, this softening process was begun by the 
reading of the romantic poets. 

The Benthamites, though at first revolutionary in a rather mild 
way, gradually ceased to be so, partly through success in con- 
verting th$ British government to some of their views, partly 
through opposition to the growing strength of socialism and trade- 
unionism. Men who were in revolt against tradition, as already 
mentioned, were of two kinds, rationalistic and romantic, though 
^!!f men like Condorcet both elements were combined. The Ben- 
thamites were almost wholly rationalistic, and so were the Socialists 
who rebelled against them as well as against the existing economic 
order. This movement does not acquire a complete philosophy 
until we come to Marx, who will be considered in a later chapter. 

The romantic form of revolt is very different from the rationalist 
form, though both are derived from the French Revolution and 
the philosophers who immediately preceded it. The romantic form 
is to be seen in Byron in an unphilosophical dress, but in Schopen- 
hauer and Nietzsche it has learnt the language of philosophy. It 
tends to emphasize the will at the expense of the intellect, to be 
impatient of chains of reasoning, and to glorify violence of certain 
kinds. In practical politics it is important as an ally of nationalism. 
In tendency, if not always in fact, it is definitely hostile to what 
is commonly called reason, and tends to be anti-scientific. Some* 
of its most extreme forms are to be found among Russian anar- 
chists, but in Russia it was the rationalist form of revolt that 

751 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

finally prevailed. It was Germany, always more susceptible to 
romanticism than any other country, that provided a governmental 
outlet for the anti-rational philosophy of naked will. 

So far, the philosophies that we have been considering have had 
an inspiration which was traditional, literary, or political. But there 
were two other sources of philosophical opinion, namely science 
and machine production. The second of these began its theoretical 
influence with Marx, and has grown gradually more important 
ever since. The first has been important since the seventeenth 
century, but took new forms during the nineteenth century. 

What Galileo and Newton were to the seventeenth century, 
Darwin was to the nineteenth. Darwin's theory had two parts. On 
the one hand, there was the doctrine of evolution, which main- 
tained that the different forms of life had developed gradually 
from a common ancestry. This doctrine, which is now generally 
accepted, was not new. It had been maintained by Lamarck and 
by Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, not to mention Anaximander. 
Darwin supplied an immense mass of evidence for the doctrine, 
and in the second part of his theory believed himself to have 
discovered the cause of evolution. He thus gave to the doctrine 
a popularity and a scientific force which it had not previously 
possessed, but he by no means originated it. 

The second part of Darwin's theory was the struggle for exis- 
tence and the survival of the fittest. All animals and plants multiply 
faster than nature can provide for them ; therefore in each genera- 
tion many perish before the age for reproducing themselves. What 
determines which will survive? To some extent, no doubt, sheer 
luck, but there is another cause of more importance. Animals and 
plants are, as a rule, not exactly like their parents, but differ 
slightly by excess or defect in every measurable characteristic. In 
a given environment, members of the same species compete for 
survival, and those best adapted to the environment have the best 
chance. Therefore among chance variations those that are favour- 
able wilf preponderate among adults in each generation. Thus 
from age to age deer run more swiftly, cats stalk their prey more 
silently, and giraffes' necks become longer. Given enough time, 
this mechanism, so Darwin contended, could account for the whole 
long development from the protozoa to homo tapien*. 

This pan of Darwin's theory has been much disputed, and is 
regarded by most biologists as subject to many important quali- 

75* 



CURRENTS OF THOUGHT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

fications. That, however, is not what most concerns the historian 
of nineteenth-century ideas. From the historical point of view, 
what is interesting is Darwin's extension to the whole of life of 
the economics that characterized the philosophical radicals. The 
motive force, of evolution, according to him, is a kind of biological 
economics in a world of free competition. It was Malthus's doctrine 
of population, extended to the world of animals and plants, that 
suggested to Darwin the struggle for existence and the survival 
of the fittest as the source of evolution. 

Darwin himself was a liberal, but his theories had consequences 
in some degree inimical to traditional liberalism. The doctrine that 
all men are born equal, and that the differences between adults are 
due wholly to education, was incompatible with his emphasis on 
congenital differences between members of the same species. If, 
as Lamarck held, and as Darwin himself was willing to concede 
up to a point, acquired characteristics were inherited, this oppo- 
sition to such views as those of Helvetius could have been some- 
what softened; but it has appeared that only congenital charac- 
teristics are inherited, apart from certain not very important 
exceptions. Thus the congenital differences between men acquire 
fundamental importance. 

There is a further consequence of the theory of evolution, which 
is independent of the particular mechanism suggested by Darwin. 
T ff men and animals have a common ancestry, and if men developed 
by such slow stages that there were creatures which we should not 
know whether to classify as human or not, the question arises: at 
what stage in evolution did men, or their semi-human ancestors, 
begin to be all equal? Would Pithecanthropus erect us, if he had 
been properly educated, have done work as good as Newton's? 
Would the Piltdown Man have written Shakespeare's poetry if 
there had been anybody to convict him of poaching? A resolute 
egalitarian who answers these questions in the affirmative will find 
himself forced to regard apes as the equals of human beings. And 
why stop with apes? I do not see how he is to resist an*argument 
in favour of Votes for Oysters. An adherent of evolution should 
maintain that not only the doctrine of the equality of all men, but 
also that of the rights of man, must be condemned as unbiological, 
since it makes too emphatic a distinction between men and other 
animals. 

There is, however, another aspect of liberalism which was greatly 

753 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

strengthened by the doctrine of evolution, namely the belief in 
progress. So long as the state of the world allowed optimism, 
evolution was welcomed by liberals, both on this ground and 
because it gave new arguments against orthodox theology. Marx 
himself, though his doctrines are in some respects pre-Darwinian, 
wished to dedicate his book to Darwin. 

The prestige of biology caused men whose thinking was in- 
fluenced by science to apply biological rather than mechanistic 
categories to the world. Everything was supposed to be evolving, 
and it was easy to imagine an immanent goal. In spite of Darwin, 
many men considered that evolution justified a belief in cosmic 
purpose. The conception of organism came to be thought the key 
to both scientific and philosophical explanations of natural laws, 
and the atomic thinking of the eighteenth century came to be 
regarded as out of date. This point of view has at last influenced 
even theoretical physics. In politics it leads naturally to emphasis 
upon the community as opposed to the individual. This is in 
harmony with the growing power of the State ; also with national- 
ism, which can appeal to the Darwinian doctrine of survival of 
the finest applied, not to individuals, but to nations. But here we 
are passing into the region of extra-scientific views suggested to a 
large public by scientific doctrines imperfectly understood. 

While biology has militated against a mechanistic view of the 
world, modern economic technique has had an opposite effecf* 
Until about the end of the eighteenth century, scientific technique, 
as opposed to scientific doctrines, had no important effect upon 
opinion. It was only with the rise of industrialism that technique 
began to affect men's thought. And even then, for a long time, 
the effect was more or less indirect. Men who produce philoso- 
phical theories are, as a rule, brought into very little contact with 
machinery. The romantics noticed and hated the ugliness that 
industrialism was producing in places hitherto beautiful, and the 
vulgarity (as they considered it) of those who had made money 
in "trade/' This led them into an opposition to the middle class 
which sometimes brought them into something like an alliance 
with the champions of the proletariat. Engels praised Carlyle, not 
perceiving that what Carlyle desired was not the emancipation of 
fage-earners, but their subjection to the kind of masters they had 
had in the Middle Ages. The Socialists welcomed industrialism, 
but wished to free industrial workers from subjection to the power 

754 



CURRENTS OP THOUGHT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 

of employers. They were influenced by industrialism in the prob- 
lems that they considered, but not much in the ideas that they 
employed in the solution of their problems. 

The most important effect of machine production on the imagi- 
native picture of the world is an immense increase in the sense of 
human power. This is only an acceleration of a process which 
began before the dawn of history, when men diminished their fear 
of wild animals by the invention of weapons and their fear of 
starvation by the invention of agriculture. But the acceleration has 
been so great as to produce a radically new outlook in those who 
wield the powers that modern technique has created. In old days, 
mountains and waterfalls were natural phenomena; now, an in- 
convenient mountain can be abolished and a convenient waterfall 
can be created. In old days, there were deserts and fertile regions; 
now, the desert can, if people think it worth while, be made to 
blossom like the rose, while fertile regions are turned into deserts 
by insufficiently scientific optimists. In old days, peasants lived as 
their parents and grandparents had lived, and believed as their 
parents and grandparents had believed ; not all the power of the 
Church could eradicate pagan ceremonies, which had to be given 
a Christian dress by being connected with local saints. Now the 
authorities can decree what the children of peasants shall learn in 
school, and can transform the mentality of agriculturists in a 
generation ; one gathers that this has been achieved in Russia. 

There thus arises, among those who direct affairs or are in touch 
with those who do so, a new belief in power: first, the power of 
man in his conflicts with nature, and then the power of rulers as 
against the human beings whose beliefs and aspirations they seek 
to control by scientific propaganda, especially education. The result 
is a diminution of fixity; no change seems impossible. Nature is 
raw material ; so is that part of the human race which does not 
effectively participate in government. There are certain old con- 
ceptions which represent men's belief in the limits of human power ; 
of these the two chief are God and truth. (I do not mean that these 
two are logically connected.) Such conceptions tend to melt away; 
even if not explicitly negated, they lose importance, and are re- 
tained only superficially. This whole outlook is new, and it is 
impossible to say how mankind will adapt itself to it. It has alreaUy 
produced immense cataclysms, and will no doubt produce others 
in the future. To frame a philosophy capable of coping with men 

755 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

intoxicated with the prospect of almost unlimited power and also 
with the apathy of the powerless is the most pressing task of our 
time. 

Though many still sincerely believe in human equality and 
theoretical democracy, the imagination of modern people is deeply 
affected by the pattern of social organization suggested by the 
organization of industry in the nineteenth century, which is essen- 
tially undemocratic. On the one hand there are the captains of 
industry, and on the other the mass of workers. This disruption 
of democracy from within is not yet acknowledged by ordinary 
citizens in democratic countries, but it has been a preoccupation 
of most philosophers from Hegel onwards, and the sharp oppo- 
sition which they discovered between the interests of the many 
and those of the few has found practical expression in Fascism. 
Of the philosophers, Nietzsche was unashamedly on the side of 
the few, Marx whole-heartedly on the side of the many. Perhaps 
Bentham was the only one of importance who attempted a recon- 
ciliation of conflicting interests ; he therefore incurred the hostility 
of both parties. 

To formulate any satisfactory modern ethic of human relation- 
ships, it will be essential to recognize the necessary limitations of 
men's power over the non-human environment, and the desirable 
limitations of their nower over each other. 



Chapter XXII 
HEGEL 



HEGEL (1770-1831) was the culmination of the movement 
in German philosophy that started from Kant; although 
he often criticized Kant, his system could never have 
arisen if Kant's had not existed. His influence, though now 
diminishing, has been very great, not only or chiefly in Germany. 
At the end of the nineteenth century, the leading academic philo- 
sophers, both in America and in Great Britain, were largely 
Hegelians. Outside of pure philosophy, many Protestant theolo- 
gians adopted his doctrines, and his philosophy of history pro- 
foundly affected political theory. Marx, as everyone knows, was 
a disciple of Hegel in his youth, and retained in his own finished 
system some important Hegelian features. Even if (as I myself 
believe) almost all Hegel's doctrines are false, he still retains an 
importance which is not merely historical, as the best represen- 
tative of a certain kind of philosophy which, in others, is less 
coherent and less comprehensive. 

His life contained few events of importance. In youth he was 
much attracted to mysticism, and his later views may be regarded, 
to some extent, as an intellectualizing of what had first appeared 
to him as mystic insight. He taught philosophy, first as Privatdozent 
at Jena he mentions that he finished his Phenomenology of Mind 
there the day before the battle of Jena then at Nuremberg, then 
as professor at Heidelberg (1816-1818), and finally at Berlin from 
1818 to his death. He was in later life a patriotic Prussian, a loyal 
servant of the State, who comfortably enjoyed his recognized 
philosophical pre-eminence; but in his youth he despised Prussia 
and admired Napoleon, to the extent of rejoicing in the French 
victory at Jena. 

Hegel's philosophy is very difficult he is, I should say, t the 
hardest to understand of all the great philosophers. Before entering 
on any detail, a general characterization may prove helpful. 

From his early interest in mystjcism he retained a belief in the 
unreality of separateness ; the world, in his view, was not a col- 
lection of hard units, whether atoms or souls, each completely 
self-subsistent. The apparent self-subsistence of finite things 

757 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

appeared to him to be an illusion; nothing, he held, is ultimately 
and completely real except the whole. But he differed from 
Parmenides and Spinoza in conceiving the whole, not as a simple 
substance, but as a complex system, of the sort that we should call 
an organism. The apparently separate things of which the world 
seems to be composed are not .simply an illusion ; each has a 
greater or lesser degree of reality, and its reality consists in an 
aspect of the whole, which is what it is seen to be when viewed 
truly. With this view goes naturally a disbelief in the reality of 
time and space as such, for these, if taken as completely real, 
involve separateness and multiplicity. All this must have come to 
him first as mystic "insight 1 '; its intellectual elaboration, which 
is given in his books, must have come later. 

Hegel asserts that the real is rational, and the rational is real. 
But when he says this he does not mean by "the real" what an 
empiricist would mean. He admits, and even urges, that what to 
the empiricist appear to be facts are, and must be, irrational ; it is 
only after their apparent character has been transformed by viewing 
them as aspects of the whole that they are seen to be rational. 
Nevertheless, the identification of the real and the rational leads 
unavoidably to some of the complacency inseparable from the 
belief that "whatever is, is right/ 1 

The whole, in all its complexity, is called by Hegel "the Abso- 
lute." The Absolute is spiritual; Spinoza's view, that it has thl 
attribute of extension as well as that of thought, is rejected. 

Two things distinguish Hegel from other men who liave had a 
more or less similar metaphysical outlook. One of these is emphasis 
on logic: it is thought by Hegel that the nature of Reality can be 
deduced from the sole consideration that it must be not self- 
contradictory. The other distinguishing feature (which is closely 
connected with the first) is the triadic movement called the 
"dialectic.** His most important books are his two /xgja, and 
these must be understood if the reasons for his views on other 
subjects are to be rightly apprehended. 

Logic, as Hegel understands die word, is declared by him to be 
the same thing as metaphysics; it is something quite different from 
what is commonly called logic. His view is that any ordinary pre- 
dicate, if taken as qualifying the whole of Reality, turns out to be 
self-contradictory. One might take as a crude example the theory 
of Pannenidet, that the One, which alone u real, i* spherical. 

758 



HEGEL 

Nothing can be spherical unless it has a boundary, and it cannot 
have a boundary unless there is something (at least empty space) 
outside of it. Therefore to suppose the Universe as a whole to be 
spherical is self-contradictory. (This argument might be questioned 
by bringing* in non-Euclidean geometry, but as an illustration it 
will serve.) Or let us take another illustration, still more crude 
far too much so to be used by Hegel. You may say, without 
apparent contradiction, that Mr. A is an uncle; but if you were 
to say that the Universe is an uncle, you would land yourself in 
difficulties. An uncle is a man who has a nephew, and the nephew 
is a separate person from the uncle ; therefore an uncle cannot be 
the whole of Reality. 

This illustration might also be used to illustrate the dialectic, 
which consists of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. First we say: 
"Reality is an uncle." This is the thesis. But the existence of an 
uncle implies that of a nephew. Since nothing really exists except 
the Absolute, and we are now committed to the existence of a 
nephew, we must conclude: "The Absolute is a nephew." This 
is the antithesis. But there is the same objection to this as to the 
view that the Absolute is an uncle; therefore we are driven to the 
view that the Absolute is the whole composed of uncle and nephew. 
This is the synthesis. But this synthesis is still unsatisfactory, 
because a man can be an uncle only if he has a brother or sister 
who is a parent of the nephew. Hence we are driven to enlarge 
our universe to include the brother or sister, with his wife or her 
husband. In this sort of way, so it is contended, we can be driven 
on, by the mere force of logic, from any suggested predicate of 
the Absolute to the final conclusion of the dialectic, which is called 
the "Absolute Idea." Throughout the whole process, there is an 
underlying assumption that nothing can be really true unless it 
is about Reality as a whole. 

For this underlying assumption there is a basis in traditional 
logic, which assumes that every proposition has a subject and a 
predicate. According to this view, every fact consists in something 
having some property. It follows that relations cannot be real, 
since they involve two things, not one. "Uncle" is a relation, and 
a man may become an uncle without knowing it. In that case, 
from an empirical point of view, the man is unaffected by becoming 
an uncle; he has no quality which he did not have before, if by 
"quality" we understand something necessary to describing 1pm 

759 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

as he is in himself, apart from his relations to other people and 
things. The only way in which the subject-predicate logic can 
avoid this difficulty is to say that the truth is not a property of the 
uncle alone, or of the nephew alone, but of the whole composed 
of uncle-and-nephew. Since everything, except the -Whole, has 
relations to outside things, it follows that nothing quite true can 
be said about separate things, and that in fact only the Whole is 
real. This follows more directly from the fact that "A and B are 
two" is not a subject-predicate proposition, and therefore, on the 
basis of the traditional logic, there can be no such proposition. 
Therefore there are not as many as two things in the world ; there- 
fore the Whole, considered as a unity, is alone real. 

The above argument is not explicit in Hegel, but is implicit in 
his system, as in that of many other metaphysicians. 

A few examples of Hegel's dialectic method may serve to make 
it more intelligible. He begins the argument of his logic by the 
assumption that "the Absolute is Pure Being"; we assume that it 
just u, without assigning any qualities to it. But pure being without 
any qualities is nothing; therefore we are led to the antithesis: 
"The Absolute is Nothing." From this thesis and antithesis we 
pass on to the synthesis: the union of Being and Not-Being is 
Becoming, and so we say: "The Absolute is Becoming." This also, 
of course, won't do, because there has to be something ths" 
becomes. In this way our views of Reality develop by the continue 
correction of previous errors, all of which arose from undue ab- 
straction, by taking something finite or limited as if it could be 
the whole. "The limitations of the finite do not come merely from 
without; its own nature is the cause of its abrogation, and by its 
own act it passes into its counterpart," 

The process, according to Hegel, is essential to the understand- 
ing of the result. Each later stage of the dialectic contains all the 
earlier stages, as it were in solution ; none of them is wholly super- 
seded, but is given its proper place as a moment in the Whole. 
It is therefore impossible to reach the truth except by going through 
all the steps of the dialectic. 

Knowledge as a whole has its triadic movement. It begins with 
sense-perception, in which there is only awareness of the object. 
Then, through sceptical criticism of the senses, it becomes purely 
subjective. At last, it reaches the stage of self-knowledge, in which 
subject and object are no longer distinct. Thus self-consciousness 

760 



HBGBL 

is the highest form of knowledge. This, of course, must be the case 
in Hegel's system, for the highest kind of knowledge must be that 
possessed by the Absolute, and as the Absolute is the Whole there 
is nothing outside itself for it to know. 

In the best thinking, according to Hegel, thoughts become fluent 
and interfuse. Truth and falsehood are not sharply defined oppo- 
sites, as is commonly supposed ; nothing is wholly false, and noth- 
ing that we can know is wholly true. "We can know in a way that 
is false"; this happens when we attribute absolute truth to some 
detached piece of information. Such a question as "Where was 
Caesar born?" has a straightforward answer, which is true in a 
sense, but not in the philosophical sense. For philosophy, "the 
truth is the whole," and nothing partial is quite true. 

"Reason," Hegel says, "is the conscious certainty of being all 
reality." This does not mean that a separate person is all reality; 
in his separateness he is not quite real, but what is real in him is 
his participation in Reality as a whole. In proportion as we become 
more rational, this participation is increased. 

The Absolute Idea, with which the Logic ends, is something like 
Aristotle's God. It is thought thinking about itself. Clearly the 
Absolute cannot think about anything but itself, since there is 
nothing else, except to our partial and erroneous ways of appre- 
hending Reality. We are told that Spirit is the only reality, and 
tffat its thought is reflected into itself by self-consciousness. The 
actual words in which the Absolute Idea is defined are very 
obscure. Wallace translates them as follows: 

"The Absolute Idea. The idea, as unity of the Subjective and 
Objective Idea, is the notion of the Idea a notion whose object 
(Gegcnstand) is the Idea as such, and for which the objective 
(Objekt) is Idea an Object which embraces all characteristics 
in its unity." 

The original German is even more difficult. 1 The essence of the 
matter is, however, somewhat less complicated than Hegel makes 
it seem. The Absolute Idea is pure thought thinking about pure 
thought. This is all that God does throughout the ages truly a 
Professor's God. Hegel goes on to say: "This unity is consequently 
the absolute and all truth, the Idea which thinks itself." 

1 The definition in German is; "Zfcr Begriff tier Idee, dem die Idee als 
wlche der Gegcnstand, dem das Objekt fif uf." Except in Hegel, Gcgen- 
ttand and Objekt are synonyms. 

761 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

I come now to a singular feature of Hegel's philosophy, which 
distinguishes it from the philosophy of Plato or Plotinus or 
Spinoza. Although ultimate reality is timeless, and time is merely 
an illusion generated by our inability to see the Whole, yet the 
time-process has an intimate relation to the purely logical process 
of the dialectic. World history, in fact, has advanced through the 
categories, from Pure Being in China (of which Hegel knew 
nothing except that it was) to the Absolute Idea, which seems to 
have been nearly, if not quite, realized in the Prussian State. I 
cannot see any justification, on the basis of his own metaphysic, 
for the view that world history repeats the transitions of the 
dialectic, yet that is the thesis which he developed in his Philosophy 
of History. It was an interesting thesis, giving unity and meaning 
to the revolutions of human affairs. Like other historical theories, 
it required, if it was to be made plausible, some distortion of 
facts and considerable ignorance. Hegel, like Mane and Spengler 
after him, possessed both these qualifications. It is odd that a 
process which is represented as cosmic should all have taken place 
on our planet, and most of it near the Mediterranean. Nor is 
there any reason, if reality is timeless, why the later parts of the 
process should embody higher categories than the earlier parts 
unless one were to adopt the blasphemous supposition that the 
Universe was gradually learning Hegel's philosophy. 

The time-process, according to Hegel, is from the less to fflt* 
more perfect, both in an ethical and in a logical sense. Indeed 
these two senses are, for him, not really distinguishable, for logical 
perfection consists in being a closely-knit whole, without ragged 
edges, without independent parts, but united, like a human body, 
or still more like a reasonable mind, into an organism whose pans 
are interdependent and all work together towards a single end ; 
and this also constitutes ethical perfection. A few quotations will 
illustrate Hegel's theory: 

"Ijke ihe soul-conductor Mercury, the Idea is, in truth, the 
leader of peoples and of the world; and Spirit, the rational and 
necessitated will of that conductor, is and has been the director 
of the events of the world's history. To become acquainted with 
Spirit in this its office of guidance, is the object of our present 
Undertaking. * 

"The only thought which philosophy brings with it to the con- 
templation of history is the simple conception of Reason; that 



HEGEL 

Reason is the sovereign 6f the world ; that the history of the world, 
therefore, presents us with a rational process. This conviction 
and intuition is a hypothesis in the domain of history as such. In 
that of philosophy it is no hypothesis. It is there proved by 
speculative cognition, that Reason and this term may here suffice 
us, without investigating the relation sustained by the universe 
to the Divine Being is Substance, as well as Infinite Power \ its 
own infinite material underlying all the natural and spiritual life 
which it originates, as also the Infinite Form, that which sets the 
material in motion. Reason is the substance of the universe." 

'That this 'Idea' or 'Reason' is the True, the Eternal, the abso- 
lutely powerful essence; that it reveals itself in the world, and that 
in that world nothing else is revealed but this and its honour and 
glory is the thesis which, as we have said, has been proved in 
philosophy, and is here regarded as demonstrated." 

"The world of intelligence and conscious volition is not 
abandoned to chance, but must show itself in the light of the 
self-cognizant Idea." 

This is "a result which happens to be known to me, because I 
have traversed the entire field." 

All these quotations are from the introduction to The Philosophy 
of History. 

Spirit, and the course of its development, is the substantial 
' (ftject of the philosophy of history. The nature of Spirit may be 
understood by contrasting it with its opposite, namely Matter. 
The essence of matter is gravity; the essence of Spirit is Freedom. 
Matter is outside itself, whereas Spirit has its centre in itself. 
"Spirit is self-contained existence." If this is not clear, the 
following definition may be found more illuminating: 

"But what is Spirit? It is the one immutably homogeneous 
Infinite pure Identity which in its second phase separates 
itself from itself and makes this second aspect its own polar 
opposite, namely as existence for and in Self as contiyted with 
the Universal. " 

In the historical development of Spirit there have been three 
main phases: The Orientals, the Greeks and Romans, and the 
Germans. "The history of the world is the discipline of the un- 
controlled natural will, bringing it into obedience to a universal 
principle and conferring subjective freedom. The East knew, and 
to the present day knows, only that On* is free; the Greek an f d 

763 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Roman world, that some are free; the German world knows that 
All are free." One might have supposed that democracy would 
be the appropriate form of government where all are free, but 
not so. Democracy and aristocracy alike belong to the stage where 
some are free, despotism to that where one is free, pnd monarchy 
to that in which all are free. This is connected with the very odd 
sense in which Hegel uses the word "freedom." For him (and 
so far we may agree) there is no freedom without law; but he 
tends to convert this, and to argue that wherever there is law 
there is freedom. Thus "freedom/ 9 for him, means little more than 
the right to obey the law. 

As might be expected, he assigns the highest role to the Ger- 
mans in the terrestrial development of Spirit. "The German 
spirit is the spirit of the new world. Its aim is the realization of 
absolute Truth as the unlimited self-determination of freedom 
that freedom which has its own absolute form itself as its purport/* 

This is a very superfine brand of freedom. It does not mean 
that you will be able to keep out of a concentration camp. It does 
not imply democracy, or a free press, 1 or any of the usual Liberal 
watchwords, which Hegel rejects with contempt. When Spirit 
gives laws to itself, it does so freely. To our mundane vision, it 
may seem that the Spirit that gives laws is embodied in the 
monarch, and the Spirit to which laws are given is embodied in 
his subjects. But from the point of view of the Absolute the dR* 
Unction between monarch and subjects, like all other distinctions, 
is illusory, and when the monarch imprisons a liberal-minded 
subject, that is still Spirit freely determining itself. Hegel praises 
Rousseau for distinguishing between the general will and the will 
of all. One gathers that the monarch embodies the general will, 
whereas a parliamentary majority only embodies the will of all. 
A very convenient doctrine. 

German history is divided by Hegel into three periods: the 
first, up to Charlemagne; the second, from Charlemagne to the 
Reformation; the third, from the Reformation onwards. These 
three periods are distinguished as the Kingdoms of the Father, 
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, respectively. It seems a little odd 

' Freedom of the Press, he say*, does not consist in being allowed to 
write what one wants: this view is crude and superficial. For instance, 
the Pras should not be allowed to muter the Government or the polirr 
contemptible. 

764 



HEGEL 

that the Kingdom of the Holy Ghost should have begun with the 
bloody and utterly abominable atrocities committed in suppressing 
the Peasants' War, but Hegel, naturally, does not mention so 
trivial an incident. Instead, he goes off, as might be expected, into 
praises of Machiavelli. 

Hegel's interpretation of history since the fall of the Roman 
Empire is partly the effect, and partly the cause, of the teaching 
of world history in German schools. In Italy and France, while 
there has been a romantic admiration of the Germans on the part 
of a few men such as Tacitus and Machiavelli, they have been 
viewed, in general, as the authors of the "barbarian" invasion, 
and as enemies of the Church, first under the great Emperors, 
and later as the leaders of the Reformation. Until the nineteenth 
century the Latin nations looked upon the Germans as their 
inferiors in civilization. Protestants in Germany naturally took a 
different view. They regarded the late Romans as effete, and 
considered the German conquest of the Western Empire an 
essential step towards revivification. In relation to the conflict 
of Empire and Papacy in the Middle Ages, they took a Ghibelline 
view: to this day, German schoolboys are taught a boundless 
admiration of Charlemagne and Barbarossa. In the times after 
the Reformation, the political weakness and disunity of Germany 
was deplored, and the gradual rise of Prussia was welcomed as 
.naking Germany strong under Protestant leadership, not under 
the Catholic and somewhat feeble leadership of Austria. Hegel, in 
philosophizing about history, has in mind such men as Theodoric, 
Charlemagne, Barbarossa, Luther, and Frederick the Great. He 
is to be interpreted in the light of their exploits, and in the light 
of the then recent humiliation of Germany by Napoleon. 

So much is Germany glorified that one might expect to find it 
the final embodiment of the Absolute Idea, beyond which no 
further development would be possible. But this is not Hegel's 
view. On the contrary, he says that America is the land of the 
future, "where, in the ages that lie before us, the burden of the 
world's history shall reveal itself perhaps [he adds characteris- 
tically] in a contest between North and South America/' He seems 
to think that everything important takes the form of war. If it 
were suggested to him that the attribution of America to world 
history might be the development of a society without extreme 
poverty, he would not be interested. On the contrary, he says 

765 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

that, as yet, there is no real State in America, because a real State 
requires a division of classes into rich and poor. 

Nations, in Hegel, play the part that classes play in Marx. The 
principle of historical development, he says, is national genius. 
In every age, there is some one nation which is changed with the 
mission of carrying the world through the stage of the dialectic 
that it has reached. In our age, of course, this nation is Germany. 
But in addition to nations, we must also take account of world- 
historical individuals; these are men in whose aims are embodied 
the dialectical transitions that are due to take place in their time. 
These men are heroes, and may justifiably contravene ordinary 
moral rules. Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon are given as 
examples. I doubt whether, in Hegel's opinion, a man could be a 
"hero" without being a military conqueror. 

Hegel's emphasis on nations, together with his peculiar con- 
ception of "freedom," explains his glorification of the State a 
very important aspect of his political philosophy, to which we 
must now turn our attention. His philosophy of the State is de- 
veloped both in his Philosophy of History and in his Philosophy of 
Law. It is in the main compatible with his general metaphysic, 
but not necessitated by it; at certain points, however e.g., as 
regards the relations between States his admiration of the 
national State is carried so far as to become inconsistent with 
his general preference of wholes to parts. ^ 

Glorification of the State begins, so far as modern times are con- 
cerned, with the Reformation. In the Roman Empire, the Emperor 
was deified, and the State thereby acquired a sacred character; 
but the philosophers of the Middle Ages, with few exceptions, 
were ecclesiastics, and therefore put the Church above the State* 
Luther, finding support in Protestant princes, began the opposite 
practice; the Lutheran Church, on the whole, was Erastian. Hobbes, 
who was politically a Protestant, developed the doctrine of the 
suprpnap of the State, and Spinoza, on the whole, agreed with 
him. Rousseau, as we have seen, thought the State should not 
tolerate other political organizations. Hegel was vehemently Pro- 
testant, of the Lutheran section ; the Prussian State was an Erastian 
absolute monarchy. These reasons would make one expect to find 
*thc State highly valued by H^gel, but, even so, he goes to lengths 
which are astonishing. 

We are told in The Philosophy of History that "the State is the 

766 



HBGBL 

actually existing realized moral life," and that all the spiritual 
reality possessed by a human being he possesses only through the 
State. "For his spiritual reality consists in this, that his own 
essence Reason is objectively present to him, that it possesses 
objective immediate existence for him. . . . For truth is the 
unity of the universal and subjective Will, and the universal is 
to be found in the State, in its laws, its universal and rational 
arrangements. The State is the Divine Idea as it exists on earth." 
Again: "The State is the embodiment of rational freedom, 
realizing and recognizing itself in an objective form. . . . The 
State is the Idea of Spirit in the external manifestation of human 
Will and its Freedom." 

The Philosophy of Law, in the section on the State, develops 
the same doctrine somewhat more fully. "The State is the reality 
of the moral idea the moral spirit, as the visible substantial will, 
evident to itself, which thinks and knows itself, and fulfils what 
it knows in so far as it knows it." The State is the rational in and 
for itself. If the State existed only for the interests of individuals 
(as Liberals contend), an individual might or might not be a 
member of the State. It has, however, a quite different relation 
to the individual: since it is objective Spirit, the individual only 
has objectivity, truth, and morality in so far as he is a member of 
the State, whose true content and purpose is union as such. It is 
admitted that there may be bad States, but these merely exist, 
and have no true reality, whereas a rational State is infinite in itself. 

It will be seen that Hegel claims for the State much the same 
position as St. Augustine and his Catholic successors claimed for 
the Church. There are, however, two respects in which the 
Catholic claim is more reasonable than Hegel's. In the first place, 
the Church is not a chance geographical association, but a body 
united by a common creed, believed by its members to be of 
supreme importance; it is thus in its very essence the embodi- 
ment of what Hegel calls the "Idea." In the second pl|ce 9 jhere 
is only one Catholic Church, whereas there are many States. 
When each State, in relation to its subjects, is made as absolute 
as Hegel makes it, there is difficulty in finding any philosophical 
principle by which to regulate the relations between different 
States. In fact, at this point Hegfcl abandons his philosophical 
talk, falling back on the state of nature and Hobbcs's war of all 
against all. 

767 



WfcSTfifcN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The habit of speaking of "the State/ 9 as if there were only one, 
is misleading so long as there is no world State. Duty being, for 
Hegel, solely a relation of the individual to his State, no principle 
is left by which to moralize the relations between States. This 
Hegel recognizes. In external relations, he says, the State is an 
individual, and each State is independent as against the others. 
"Since in this independence the being-for-self of real spirit has 
its existence, it is the first freedom and highest honour of a people." 
He goes on to argue against any sort of League of Nations by 
which the independence of separate States might be limited. The 
duty of a citizen is entirely confined (so far as the external relations 
of his State are concerned) to upholding the substantial indivi- 
duality and independence and sovereignty of his own State. It 
follows that war is not wholly an evil, or something that we 
should seek to abolish. The purpose of the State is not merely 
to uphold the life and property of the citizens, and this fact 
provides the moral justification of war, which is not to be regarded 
as an absolute evil or as accidental, or as having its cause in 
something that ought not to be. 

Hegel does not mean only that, in some situations, a nation 
cannot rightly avofd going to war. He means much more than 
this. He is opposed to the creation of institutions such as a 
world government which would prevent such situations from 
arising, because he thinks it a good thing that there should T5e* 
wars from time to time. War, he says, is the condition in which 
we take seriously the vanity of temporal goods and things. (This 
view is to be contrasted with the opposite theory, that all wars 
have economic causes.) War has a positive moral value: "War 
has the higher significance that through it the moral health of 
peoples is preserved in their indifference towards the stabilizing 
of finite determinations." Peace is ossification; the Holy Alliance, 
and Kant's League for Peace, are mistaken, because a family of 
States nr^ds an enemy. Conflicts of States can only be decided 
by war; States being towards each other in a state of nature, their 
relations are not legal or moral. Their rights have their reality in 
their particular wills, and the interest of cadi State is its own 
highest law. There is no contrast of morals and politics, because 
mates are not subject to ordinary moral laws. 

Such is Hegel's doctrine of the State a doctrine which, if 
Accepted, justifies every internal tyranny and every external 

768 



HEGEL 



aggression that can possibly be imagined. The strength of his 
bias appears in the fact that his theory is largely inconsistent with 
his own metaphysic, and that the inconsistencies are all such as 
tend to the justification of cruelty and international brigandage. 
A man may be pardoned if logic compels him regretfully to reach 
conclusions which he deplores, but not for departing from logic 
in order to be free to advocate crimes. Hegel's logic led him to 
believe that there is more reality or excellence (the two for him 
are synonyms) in wholes than in their parts, and that a whole 
increases in reality and excellence as it becomes more organized. 
This justified him in preferring a State to an anarchic collection 
of individuals, but it should equally have led him to prefer a 
world State to an anarchic collection of States. Within the State, 
his general philosophy should have led him to feel more respect 
for the individual than he did feel, for the wholes of which 
his Logic treats are not like the One of Parmenides, or even 
like Spinoza's God: they are wholes in which the individual 
does not disappear, but acquires fuller reality through his 
harriK>nious relation to a larger organism. A State in which the 
individual is ignored is not a small-scale model of the Hegelian 
Absolute. 

Nor is there any good reason, in Hegel's metaphysic, for the 
exclusive emphasis on the State, as opposed to other social 
urbanizations. I can see nothing but Protestant bias in his pre- 
ference of the State to the Church. Moreover, if it is good that 
society should be as organic as possible, as Hegel believes, then 
many social organizations are necessary, in addition to the State 
and the Church. It should follow from Hegel's principles that 
every interest which is not harmful to the community, and which 
can be promoted by co-operation, shou d have its appropriate 
organization, and thai every such organization should have its 
quota of limited independence. It may be objected that ultimate 
authority must reside somewhere, and cannot reside elsewhere 
than in the State. But even so it may be desirable that thisTiltimate 
authority should not be irresistible when it attempts to be 
oppressive beyond a point. . 

This brings us to a question which is fundamental in judging 
Hegel's whole philosophy. Is there more reality, and is there more < 
value, in a whole than in its parts? Hegel answers both questions 
in the affirmative. The question of reality is metaphysical, the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

question of value is ethical. They are commonly treated as if 
they were scarcely distinguishable, but to my mind it is impor- 
tant to keep them apart. Let us begin with the metaphysical 
question. 

The view of Hegel, and of many other philosophers, is that the 
character of any portion of the universe is so profoundly affected 
by its relations to the other parts and to the whole, that no true 
statement can be made about any part except to assign it its place in 
the whole. Since its place in the whole depends upon all the other 
parts, a true statement about its place in the whole will at the 
same time assign the place of every other part in the whole. Thus 
there can be only one true statement ; there is no truth except the 
whole truth. And similarly nothing is quite real except the whole, 
for any part, when isolated, is changed in character by being 
isolated, and therefore no longer appears quite what it truly is. 
On the other hand, when a part is viewed in relation to the whole, 
as it should be, it is seen to be not self-subsist en t, and to be 
incapable of existing except as pan of just that whole which alone 
is truly real. This is the metaphysical doctrine. 

The ethical doctrine, which maintains that value resides in the 
whole rather than in the parts, must be true if the metaphysical 
doctrine is true, but need not be false if the metaphysical doctrine 
is false. It may, moreover, be true of some wholes and not of 
others. It is obviously true, in some sense, of a living body. 'Wle* 
eye is worthless when separated from the body; a collection of 
disjecta membra, even when complete, has not the value that once 
belonged to the body from which they were taken. Hegel conceives 
the ethical relation of the citizen to the State as analogous to that 
of the eye to the body: in his place the citizen is part of a valuable 
whole, but isolated he is as useless as an isolated eye. The analogy, 
however, is open to question; from the ethical importance of 
some wholes, that of all wholes does not follow. 

The above statement of the ethical problem is defective in one 
important respect, namely, that it does not take account of the 
distinction between ends and means. An eye in a living body is 
useful, that is to say, it has value as a means ; but it has no more 
intrinsic value than when detached from the body. A thing has 
intrinsic value when it is prufed for its own sake, not as a means 
to something eke. We value the eye as a means to seeing. Seeing 
may be a means or an end ; it is a means when it shows us food or 



HEGEL 



enemies, it is an end when it shows us something that we find 
beautiful. The State is obviously valuable as a means: it protects 
us against thieves and murderers, it provides roads and schools, 
and so on. It may, of course, also be bad as a means, for example 
by waging an unjust war. The real question we have to ask in 
connection with Hegel is not this, but whether the State is good 
per se, as an end: do the citizens exist for the sake of the State, 
or the State for the sake of the citizens? Hegel holds the former 
view; the liberal philosophy that comes from Locke holds the 
latter. It is clear that we shall only attribute intrinsic value to the 
State if we think of it as having a life of its own, as being in some 
sense a person. At this point, Hegel's metaphysic becomes relevant 
to the question of value. A person is a complex whole, having a 
single life; can there be a super-person, composed of persons as 
the body is composed of organs, and having a single life which is 
not the sum of the lives of the component persons? If there can 
be such a super-person, as Hegel thinks, then the State may be 
such a being, and it may be as superior to ourselves as the whole 
body is to the eye. But if we think this super-person a mere meta- 
physical monstrosity, then we shall say that the intrinsic value of 
a community is derived from that of its members, and that the 
State is a means, not an end. We are thus brought back from the 
ethical to the metaphysical question. The metaphysical question 
itself, we shall find, is really a question of logic. 

The question at issue is much wider than the truth or falsehood 
of Hegel's philosophy; it is die question that divides the friends 
of analysis from its enemies. Let us take an illustration. Suppose 
I say "John is the father of James." Hegel, and all who believe 
in what Marshal Smuts calls "holism," will say: "Before you can 
understand this statement, you must know who John and James 
are. Now to know who John is, is to know all his characteristics, 
for apart from them he would not be distinguishable from any 
one else. But all his characteristics involve other people tr things. 
He is characterized by his relations to his parents, his wife, and 
his children, by whether he is a good or a bad citizen, and by 
the country to which he belongs. All these things you must know 
before you can be said to know wljom the word 'John* refers to.. 
Step by step, in your endeavour to say what you mean by the 
word ' John,' you will be led to take account of the whole universe, 
and your original statement will turn out to be telling you some-/ 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

thing about the universe, not about two separate people, John 
and James." 

Now this is all very well, but it is open to an initial objection. 
If the above argument were sound, how could knowledge ever 
begin? I know numbers of propositions of the form "A is the 
father of B," but I do not know the whole universe. If all know- 
ledge were knowledge of the universe as a whole, there would be 
no knowledge. This is enough to make us suspect a mistake some- 
where. 

The fact is that, in order to use the word "John" correctly and 
intelligently, I do not need to know all about John, but only enough 
to recognize him. No doubt he has relations, near or remote, to 
everything in the universe, but he can be spoken of truly without 
taking them into account, except such as are the direct subject- 
matter of what is being said. He may be the father of Jemima as 
well as of James, but it is not necessary for me to know this in 
order to know that he is the father of James. If Hegel were right, 
we could not state fully what is meant by "John is the father of 
James" without mentioning Jemima: we ought to say "John, the 
father of Jemima, is the father of James.*' This would still be 
inadequate; we should have to go on to mention his parents and 
grandparents, and a whole Who's Who. But this lands us in 
absurdities. The Hegelian position might be stated as follo^g: 4 
"The word 'John* means all that is true of John." But as a defini- 
tion this is circular, since the word "John occurs in the defining 
phrase. In fact, if Hegel were right, no word could begin to have 
a meaning, since we should need to know already the meanings 
of all other words in order to state all the properties of what the 
word designates, which, according to the theory, are what the 
word means. 

To put the matter abstractly: we must distinguish properties 
of different kinds. A thing may have a property not involving any 
othef thitig; this sort is called a quality. Or it may have a property 
involving one other thing; such a property is being married. Or 
it may have one involving two other things, such as being a 
brother-in-law. If a certain thing has a certain collection of 
Dualities, and no other thing Jias just this collection of qualities, 
then it can be defined as "the thing having such-and-such 
qualities." From its having these qualities, nothing can be deduced 
4>y pure logic as to its relational properties. Hegel thought that, 

77* 



HEGEL 

if enough was known about a thing to distinguish it from all 
other things, then all its properties could be inferred by logic. 
This was a mistake, and from this mistake arose the whole im- 
posing edifice of his system. This illustrates an important truth, 
namely, lhat the worse your logic, the more interesting the 
consequences to which it gives rise. 



773 



Chapter XXIII 
BYRON 

t i <HE nineteenth century, in comparison with the present age, 
I appears rational, progressive, and satisfied ; yet the opposite 

A qualities of our time were possessed by many of the most 
remarkable men during the epoch of liberal optimism. When we 
consider men, not as artists or discoverers, not as sympathetic or 
antipathetic to our own tastes, but as forces, as causes of change 
in the social structure, in judgments of value, or in intellectual 
outlook, we find that the course of events in recent times has 
necessitated much readjustment in our estimates, making some 
men less important than they had seemed, and others more so. 
Among those whose importance is greater than it seemed, Byron 
deserves a high place. On the Continent, such a view would not 
appear surprising, but in the English-speaking world it may be 
thought strange. It was on the Continent that Byron was influential, 
and it is not in England that his spiritual progeny is to be sought. 
To most of us, his verse seems often poor and his sentiment often 
tawdry, but abroad his way of feeling and his outlook on life were 
transmitted and developed and transmuted until they became * 
wide-spread as to be factors in great events. 

The aristocratic rebel, of whom Byron was in his day the 
exemplar, is a very different type from the leader of a peasant or 
proletarian revolt. Those who are hungry have no need of an 
elaborate philosophy to stimulate or excuse discontent, and any- 
thing of the kind appears to them merely an amusement of the 
idle rich. They want what others have, not some intangible and 
metaphysical good. Though they may preach Christian love, as 
the medieval communist rebels did, their real reasons for doing 
BO are very simple: that the lack of it in the rich and powerful 
causes the sufferings of the poor, and that the presence of it 
among comrades in revolt is thought essential to success. But 
experience of the struggle leads to a despair of the power of love, 
teaving naked hate as the driving force. A rebel of this type, if, 
like Marx, he invents a philosophy, invents one solely designed 
to demonstrate the ultimate victory of his party, not one con- 
cerned with values. His values remain primitive: the good is 

774 



BYRON 

enough to cat, and the rest is talk. No hungry man is likely to 
think otherwise. 

The aristocratic rebel, since he has enough to eat, must have 
other causes of discontent. I do not include among rebels the 
mere leaders of factions temporarily out of power; I include only 
men whose philosophy requires some greater change than their 
own personal success. It may be that love of power is the under- 
ground source of their discontent, but in their conscious thought 
there is criticism of the government of the world, which, when it 
goes deep enough, takes the form of Titanic cosmic self-assertion 
or, in those who retain some superstition, of Satanism. Both are 
to be found in Byron. Both, largely through men whom he in- 
fluenced, became common in large sections of society which could 
hardly be deemed aristocratic. The aristocratic philosophy of 
rebellion, growing, developing, and changing as it approached 
maturity, has inspired a long series of revolutionary move- 
ments, from the Carbonari after the fall of Napoleon to Hitler's 
coup in 1933; and at each stage it has inspired a correspond- 
ing manner of thought and feeling among intellectuals and 
artists. 

It is obvious that an aristocrat does not become a rebel unless 
his temperament and circumstances are in some way peculiar. 
Byron's circumstances were very peculiar. His earliest recollec- 
tftns were of his parents* quarrels; his mother was a woman 
whom he feared for her cruelty and despised for her vulgarity; 
his nurse combined wickedness with the strictest Calvinist 
theology ; his lameness filled him with shame, and prevented him 
from being one of the herd at school. At ten years old, after living 
in poverty, he suddenly found himself a Lord and the owner of 
Newstead. His great-uncle the "wicked Lord," from whom he 
inherited, had killed a man in a duel thirty-three years ago, and 
bc*n ostracized by his neighbours ever since. The Byrons had 
been a lawless family, and the Gordons, his mother's^nc^stors, 
even more so. After the squalor of a back street in Aberdeen, the 
boy naturally rejoiced in his title and his Abbey, and was willing 
to take on the character of his ancestors in gratitude for their 
lands. And if, in Decent years, their bellicosity had led them into 
trouble, he learnt that in former centuries it had brought them 
renown. One of his earliest poems/'On Leaving Newstead Abbey/' 
relates his emotions at this time, which are of admiration for hi* 

775 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

ancestors who fought in the Crusades, at Crecy, and at Marstor 
Moor. He ends with the pious resolve: 

Like you will he live, or like you will he perish : 
When decay'd, may he mingle his dust with your own. 

This is not the mood of a rebel, but it suggests "Childe" Harold, 
the modern peer who imitates medieval barons. As an under- 
graduate, when for the first time he had an income of his own, 
he wrote that he felt as independent as "a German Prince who 
coins his own cash, or a Cherokee Chief who coins no cash at all, 
but enjoys what is more precious, Liberty. I speak in raptures of 
that Goddess because my amiable Mama was so despotic." He 
wrote, in later life, much noble verse in praise of freedom, but it 
must be understood that the freedom he praised was that of a 
German Prince or a Cherokee Chief, not the inferior sort that 
might conceivably be enjoyed by ordinary mortals. 

In spite of his lineage and his title, his aristocratic relations 
fought shy of him, and he was made to feel himself socially not 
of their society. His mother was intensely disliked, and he was 
looked on with suspicion. He knew that she was vulgar, and 
darkly feared a similar defect in himself. Hence arose that peculiar 
blend of snobbery and rebellion that characterized him. If he 
could not be a gentleman in the modern style, he would be a 
bold baron in the style of his crusading ancestors, or perhaps fo 
the more ferocious but even more romantic style of the Ghibelline 
chiefs, cursed of God and Man as they trampled their way to 
splendid downfall. Medieval romances and histories were his 
etiquette books. He sinned like the Hohenstaufen, and like the 
crusaders he died fighting the Moslem. 

His shyness and sense of friendle&sness made him look for 
comfort in love-affairs, but as he was unconsciously seeking a 
mother rather than a mistress, all disappointed him except Augusta. 
Calvinism, which he never shook off to Shelley, in 1816, he 
described himself as "Methodist, Calvinist, Augustinian" made 
him feel that his manner of life was wicked ; but wickedness, he 
told himself, was a hereditary curse in his blood, an evil fate to 
which he was predestined by the Almighty. If that were indeed 
the case, since he must be rertlarkable, he would be remarkable 
as a sinner, and would dare transgressions beyond the courage of 
the fashionable libertines whom he wished to despise. He loved 

776 



BYRON 

Augusta genuinely because she was of his blood of the Ishmaelite 
race of the Byrons and also, more simply, because she had an 
elder sister's kindly care for his daily welfare. But this was not 
all that she had to offer him. Through her simplicity and her 
obliging -good-nature, she became the means of providing him 
with the most delicious self-congratulatory remorse. He could 
feel himself the equal of the greatest sinners the peer of Manfred, 
of Cain, almost of Satan himself. The Calvinist, the aristocrat, 
and the rebel were all equally satisfied ; and so was the romantic 
lover, whose heart was broken by the loss of the only earthly being 
still capable of rousing in it the gentler emotions of pity and love. 

Byron, though he felt himself the equal of Satan, never quite 
ventured to put himself in the place of God. This next step in the 
growth of pride was taken by Nietzsche, who says: "If there were 
Gods, how could I endure it to be not God ! Tlierefore there are 
no Gods. M Observe the suppressed premiss of this reasoning: 
"Whatever humbles my pride is to be judged false." Nietzsche, 
like Byron, and even to a greater degree, had a pious upbringing, 
but having a better intellect, he found a better escape than 
Satanism. He remained, however, very sympathetic to Byron. 
He says: 

"The tragedy is that we cannot believe the dogmas of religion 
^pd metaphysics if we have the strict methods of truth in heart 
and head, but on the other hand, we have become through the 
development of humanity so tenderly sensitively suffering that 
we need the highest kind of means of salvation and consolation: 
whence arises the danger that man may bleed to death through 
the truth that he recognizes. Byron expresses this in immortal 
lines: 

Sorrow is knowledge: they who know the most 
Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth, 
The Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life. 1 ' 

Sometimes, though rarely, Byron approaches more nearly to 
Nietzsche's point of view. But in general Byron's ethical theory, 
as opposed to his practice, remains strictly conventional. 

The great man, to Nietzsche, is godlike; to Byron, usually, a 
Titan at war with himself. Some'times, however, he portrays a 
sage not unlike Zarathustra the Corsair, in his dealings with his 
followers, 

777 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Still sways their souls with that commanding art 
That dazzles, leads, yet chills the vulgar heart. 

And this same hero "hated man too much to feel remorse/' A 
foot-note assures us that the Corsair is true to human -nature, since 
similar traits were exhibited by Gensertc, King of the Vandals, 
by Ezzelino the Ghibelline tyrant, and by a certain Louisiana 
pirate. 

Byron was not obliged to confine himself to the Levant and the 
Middle Ages in his search for heroes, since it was not difficult to 
invest Napoleon with a romantic mantle. The influence of 
Napoleon on the imagination of nineteenth-century Europe was 
very profound; he inspired Clausewitz, Stendhal, Heine, the 
thought of Fichte and Nietzsche, and the acts of Italian patriots. 
His ghost stalks through the age, the only force which is strong 
enough to stand up against industrialism and commerce, pouring 
scorn on pacifism and shop-keeping. Tolstoy's War and Peace is 
an attempt to exorcize the ghost, but a vain one, for the spectre 
has never been more powerful than at the present day. 

During the Hundred Days, Byron proclaimed his wish for 
Napoleon's victory, and when he heard of Waterloo he said, 'Tm 
damned sorry for it." Only once, for a moment, did he turn against 
his hero: in 1814, when (so he thought) suicide would have been 
more seemly than abdication. At this moment, he sought con- 
solation in the virtue of Washington, but the return from Elba 
made this effort no longer necessary. In France, when Byron died, 
"It was remarked in many newspapers that the two greatest men 
of the century, Napoleon and Byron, had disappeared almost at 
the same time/' 1 Carlyle, who, at the time, considered Byron "the 
noblest spirit in Europe," and felt as if he had "lost a brother," 
came afterwards to prefer Goethe, but still coupled Byron with 
Napoleon : 

"for your nobler minds, the publishing of some such Work of 
Art, in one or the other dialect, becomes almost a necessity. For 
what is it properly but an altercation with the Devil, before you 
begin honestly Fighting him ? Your Byron publishes hi* Sorrows 
ff Lard George, in verse and in prose, and copiously otherwise: 
your Bonaparte presents his Sonv&s of Napoleon Opera, in an 
ail too-ttupcndous style ; with music of canon-volleys, and murder- 
1 Mfturoit, Li/r of Byron, 

778 



BYRON 

shrieks of a world; his stage-lights are the fires of Conflagration; 
his rhyme and recitative are the tramp of embanded Hosts and 
the sound of falling Cities." 1 

It is true that, three chapters further on, he gives the emphatic 
command: "Close thy Byron; open thy Goethe." But Byron was 
in his bl&ocf, whereas Goethe remained an aspiration. 

To Carlyle, Goethe and Byron were antitheses; to Alfred de 
Musset, they were accomplices in the wicked work of instilling 
the poison of melancholy into the cheerful Gallic soul. Most young 
Frenchmen of that age knew Goethe, it seems, only through The 
Sorrows of Werther, and not at all as the Olympian. Musset 
blamed Byron for not being consoled by the Adriatic and Countess 
Guiccioli wrongly, for after he knew her he wrote no more 
Afanfreds. But Don Juan was as little read in France as Goethe's 
more cheerful poetry. In spite of Musset, most French poets, 
ever since, have found Byronic unhappiness the best material 
for their verses. 

To Musset, it was only after Napoleon that Byron and Goethe 
were the greatest geniuses of the century. Born in 1810, Musset 
was one of the generation whom he describes as "conpts entre deux 
batai/tes" in a lyrical description of the glories and disasters of the 
Krnpirc. In Germany, feeling about Xapoleon was more divided. 
There were those who, like Heine, saw him as the mighty mis- 
sionary of liberalism, the destroyer of serfdom, the enemy of 
legitimacy, the man who made hereditary princelings tremble; 
there were others who saw him as Antichrist, the would-be 
destroyer of the noble German nation, the immoralist who had 
proved once for all that Teutonic virtue can only be preserved by 
unquenchable hatred of France. Bismarck effected a synthesis: 
Napoleon remained Antichrist, but an Antichrist to be imitated, 
not merely to be abhorred. Nietzsche, who accepted the com- 
promise, remarked with ghoulish joy that the classical age of war 
is coming, and that we owe this boon, not to the French Revolution, 
but to Napoleon. And in this way nationalism, Satahisni, and 
hero-worship, the legacy of Byron, became part of the complex 
soul of Germany. 

Byron is not gentle, but violent like a thunderstorm. What he 
saya of Rousseau is applicable *o himself. Rousseau was, he 
says 

1 Parlor Ht tart us, Book 11, chap. vi. 
779 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

He who threw 

Enchantment over passion, and from woe 
Wrung overwhelming eloquence . . . 

yet he knew 

How to make madness beautiful, and cast 
O'er erring deeds and thoughts, a heavenly huQ, 

But there is a profound difference between the two men. Rousseau 
is pathetic, Byron is fierce ; Rousseau's timidity is obvious, Byron's 
is concealed ; Rousseau admires virtue provided it is simple, while 
Byron admires sin provided it is elemental. The difference, though 
it is only that between two stages in the revolt of unsocial instincts, 
is important, and shows the direction in which the movement is 
developing. 

Byron's romanticism, it must be confessed, was only half 
sincere. At times, he would say that Pope's poetry was better than 
his own, but this judgment, also, was probably only what he 
thought in certain moods. The world insisted on simplifying him, 
and omitting the element of pose in his cosmic despair and pro- 
fessed contempt for mankind. Like many other prominent men, 
he was more important as a myth than as he really was. As a 
myth, his importance, especially on the Continent, was enormous. 



Chapter XXIV 
SCHOPENHAUER 

SCHOPENHAUER (1788-1860) is in many ways peculiar 
among philosophers. He is a pessimist, whereas almost all 
the others are in some sense optimists. \Hc is not fully 
academic, like Kant and Hegel, nor yet completely outside the 
academic tradition. He dislikes Christianity, preferring the religions 
of India, both Hinduism and Buddhism. He is a man of wide 
culture, quite as much interested in art as in ethics. He is un^ 
usually free from nationalism, and as much at home with English 
and French writers as with those of his own country. His appeal 
has always been less to professional philosophers than to artistic 
and literary people in search of a philosophy that they could 
believe. He began the emphasis on Will which is characteristic of 
much nineteenth* and twentieth-century philosophy ; but for him 
Will, though metaphysically fundamental, is ethically evil an 
opposition only possible for a pessimist. He acknowledges three 
sources of his philosophy, Kant, Plato, and the Upanishads, but 
I do not think he owes as much to Plato as he thinks he does. 
I lis outlook has a certain temperamental affinity with that of the 
IWlcnistic age; it is tired and valetudinarian, valuing peace more 
than victor)-, and quietism more than attempts at reform, which 
he regards as inevitably futile. f 

Both his parents belonged to prominent commercial families in 
Danzig, where he was born. His father was a Voltairian, who re- 
garded England as the land of liberty and intelligence. In common 
with most of the leading citizens of Danzig, he hated the encroach- 
ments of Prussia on the independence of the free city, and was 
indignant when it was annexed to Prussia in 179350 indignant 
that he removed to Hamburg, at considerable pecuniary t loss. 
Schopenhauer lived there with his father from 1793 to *797; then 
he spent two years in Paris, at the end of which his father was 
pleased to find that the boy had nearly forgotten German. In 1803 
he was put in a boarding-school in England, where he hated the 
cant and hypocrisy. Two years liter, to please his father, he* 
became a clerk in a commercial house in Hamburg, but he loathed 
the prospect of a business career, and longed for a literary and. 

781 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

academic life. This was made possible by his father's death, pro- 
bably by suicide; his mother was willing that he should abandon 
commerce for school and university. It might be supposed that 
he would, in consequence, have preferred her to his father, but 
the exact opposite happened : he disliked his mother, and retained 
an affectionate memory of his father. 

Schopenhauer's mother was a lady of literary aspirations, who 

settled in Weimar two weeks before the battle of Jena. There she 

kept a literary salon, wrote books, and enjoyed friendships with 

men of culture. She had little affection for her son, and a keen 

eye for his faults. She warned him against bombast and empty 

Bathos ; he was annoyed by her philanderings. When he came of 

if* he inherited a modest competence ; after this, he and his mother 

ajojially found each other more and more intolerable. His low 

dip jtf of women is no doubt due, at least in part, to his quarrels 

*69op 9 mother. 

jnq 'spiy at Hamburg he had come under the influence of the 
aajtp soL> especially Tieck, Novalis, and Hoffmann, from whom 
UB [IAS o admire Greece and to think ill of the Hebraic elements 
miif joj ianity. Another romantic, Fried rich Schlegel, confirmed 
jo Dn&iais admiration of Indian philosophy. In the year in which 
of age (1809), he went to the university of G&tingen, 
he learnt to admire Kant. Two years later he went to Berlin, 
he studied mainly science; he heard Fichte lecture, Kjt 
icspised him. He remained inditicrent throughout the excitement 
of the war of liberation. In 1819 he became a Prrvaidozent at 
Berlin, and had the conceit to put his lectures at the same hour as 
Hegel's; having failed to lure away Hegel's hearers, he soon ceased 
to lecture. In the end he settled down to the life of an old bachelor 
in Frankfurt. He kept a poodle named Anna (the world-soul), 
walked two hours every day, smoked a long pipe, read the Ixmdon 
Times, and employed correspondents to hunt up evidences of his 
fame. He was anti-democratic, and hated the revolution of 1848; 
he believed in spiritualism and magic; in his study he had a bust 
of Kant and a bronze Buddha. In his manner of life he tried to 
imitate Kant except as regard* t,.r!y rising. 

His principal work, The World as \\ ill and Idea, was published 
'at the end of 1818. He believed it to l>c of great importance, and 
went so far as to say that some paragraphs in it had been dictated 
by the Holy Ghost. To his great mortification it fell completely 

78* 



SCHOPENHAUER 



flat. In 1844 he persuaded the publisher to bring out a second 
edition ; but it was not till some years later that he began to receive 
some of the recognition for which he longed. 

Schopenhauer's system is an adaptation of Kant's, but one that 
emphasizes quite different aspects of the Critique from those 
emphasized by Fichte or Hegel. They got rid of the thing-in- 
itself, and thus made knowledge metaphysically fundamental. 
Schopenhauer retained the thing-in-itself, but identified it with 
will. He held that what appears to perception as my body is really 
my will. There was more to be said for this v.'ew as a development 
of Kant than most Kantians were willing to recognize. Kant had 
maintained that a study of the moral law can take us behind 
phenomena, and give us knowledge which sense-perception cannot 
give; he also maintained that the moral law is essentially concerned 
with the will. The difference between a good man and a bad 
man is, for Kant, a difference in the world of things-in-themselves, 
and is also a difference as to volitions. It follows that, for Kant, 
volitions must belong to the real world, not to the world of pheno- 
mena. The phenomenon corresponding to a volition is a bodily 
movement ; that is why, according to Schopenhauer, the body is 
the appearance of which will is the reality. 

But the will which is behind phenomena cannot consist of a 
number of different volitions. Both time and space, according to 
Kant and in this Schopenhauer agrees with him belong only 
to phenomena; the thing-in-itself is not in space or time. My will, 
therefore, in the sense in which it is real, cannot be dated, nor 
can it be composed of separate acts of will, because it is space and 
time that are the source of plurality the "principle of individua- 
tion," to use the scholastic phrase which Schopenhauer prefers. 
My will, therefore, is one and timeless. Nay, more, it is to be 
identified with the will of the whole universe; my separateness is 
an illusion, resulting from my subjective apparatus of spatio- 
temporal perception. What is real is one vast will, appearing in 
the whole course of nature, animate and inanimate alike. 

So far, we might expect Schopenhauer to identify his cosmic 
will with God, and teach a pantheistic doctrine not unlike Spinoza , s, 
in which virtue would consist in conformity to the divine will. 
But at this point his pessimism leads to a different development. 
The cosmic will is wicked; will, altogether, is wicked, or at any 
rate is the source of all our endless suffering. Suffering is essential* 

783 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

to all life, and is increased by every increase of knowledge. Will 
has no fixed end, which if achieved would bring contentment. 
Although death must conquer in the end, we pursue our futile 
purposes, "as we blow out a soap-bubble as long and as large as 
possible, although we know perfectly well that it wrll burst." 
There is no such thing as happiness, for an unfulfilled wish causes 
pain, and attainment brings only satiety. Instinct urges men to 
procreation, which brings into existence a new occasion for 
suffering and death; that is why shame is associated with the 
sexual act. Suicide is useless; the doctrine of transmigration, even 
if not literally true, conveys truth in the form of a myth. 

All this is very sad, but there is a way out, and it was discovered 
in India. 

The best of myths is that of Nirvana (which Schopenhauer 
interprets as extinction). This, he agrees, is contrary to Christian 
doctrine, but "the ancient wisdom of the human race will not be 
displaced by what happened in Galilee." The cause of suffering 
is intensity of will; the less we exercise will, the less we shall 
suffer. And here knowledge turns out to be useful after all, pro- 
vided it is knowledge of a certain sort. The distinction between 
one man and another is pan of the phenomenal world, and dis- 
appears when the world is seen truly. To the good man, the veil 
of Maya (illusion) has become transparent ; he sees that all things 
are one, and that the distinction between himself and another is 
only apparent. He reaches this insight by love, which is always 
sympathy, and has to do with the pain of others. When the 
veil of Maya is lifted, a man takes on the suffering of the whole 
world. In the good man, knowledge of the whole quiets ail 
volition; his mil turns away from life and denies his own 
nature. "There arises within him a horror of the nature of 
which his own phenomenal existence is an expression, the kernel 
and inner nature of that world which is recognized as full of 
misery."* 

Hence Schopenhauer is led to complete agreement, at least as 
regards practice, with ascetic mysticism. Eckhard and Angclus 
Stksius are better than the New Testament. There are itome good 
jhings in orthodox Christianity notably the doctrine of original 
sin as preached, against "the vulgar Pclagtanism," by St. Augus- 
tine and Luther; but the Gospels are sadly deficient in meta- 
physics. Buddhism, he says, in the highest religion ; and his ethical 

784 



SCHOPENHAUER 

doctrines are orthodox throughout Asia, except where the "detest- 
able doctrine of Islam" prevails. 

The good man will practise complete chastity, voluntary poverty, 
fasting, and self-torture. In all things he will aim at breaking down 
his individual will. But he does not do this, as do the Western 
mystics, to achieve harmony with God ; no such positive good is 
sought. The good that is sought is wholly and entirely negative: 

"We must banish the dark impression of that nothingness which 
we discern behind all virtue and holiness as their final goal, and 
which we fear as children fear the dark; we must not even evade 
it like the Indians, through myths and meaningless words, such 
as reabsorption in Brahma or the Nirvana of the Buddhists. Rather 
do we freely acknowledge that what remains after the entire aboli- 
tion of will is for all those who are still full of will certainly nothing; 
but, conversely, to those in whom the will has turned and has 
denied itself, this our world, which is so real, with all its suns and 
milky ways is nothing." 

There is a vague suggestion here that the saint sees something 
positive which other men do not see, but there is nowhere a hint 
as to what this is, and I think the suggestion is only rhetorical. 
The world and ail its phenomena, Schopenhauer says, are only the 
ohjectification of will. With the surrender of the will, 

* " all those phenomena arc also abolished ; that constant strain and 
effort without end and without rest at all the grades of objectivity 
in which and through which the world consists; the multifarious 
forms succeeding each other in gradation ; the whole manifestation 
of the will ; and. finally, also the universal forms of this manifesta- 
tion, time and space, and also its last fundamental form, subject 
and object; all are abolished. No will: no idea, no world. Before 
us there is certainly only nothingness." 

We cannot interpret this except as meaning that the saint's 
purpose is to come as near as possible to non-existenc^ which, for 
some reason never clearly explained, he cannot achieve by suicide. 
Why the saint is to be preferred to a man who is always drunk 
is not very easy to see; perhaps Schopenhauer thought the sober 
moments were bound to be sadly frequent. 

Schopenhauer's gospel of resignation is not very consistent and 
not very sincere. ,The mystics to whom he appeals believed in 
contemplation; in the Beatific Vision the most profound kind pf 

7S 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

knowledge was to be achieved, and this kind of knowledge was the 
supreme good. Ever since Parmenides, the delusive knowledge 
of appearance was contrasted with another kind of knowledge, 
not with something of a wholly different kind. Christianity teaches 
that in knowledge of God standeth our eternal life. But Schopen- 
hauer will have none of this. He agreed that what commonly passes 
for knowledge belongs to the realm of Maya, but when we pierce 
the veil, we behold not God, but Satan, the wicked omnipotent 
will, perpetually busied in weaving a web of suffering for the 
torture of its creatures. Terrified by the Diabolic Vision, the sage 
cries "Avaum!" and seeks refuge in non-existence. It is an insult 
to the mystics to claim them as believers in this mythology. And 
the suggestion that, without achieving complete non-existence, 
the sage may yet live a life having some value, is not possible to 
reconcile with Schopenhauer's pessimism. So long as the sage 
exists, he exists because he retains will, which is evil. He may 
diminish the quantity of evil by weakening his will, but he can 
never acquire any positive good. 

Nor is the doctrine sincere, if we may judge by Schopenhauer's 
life. He habitually dined well, at a good restaurant; he had many 
trivial love-affairs, which were sensual but not passionate; he was 
exceedingly quarrelsome and unusually avaricious. On one occa- 
sion he was annoyed by an elderly seamstress who was talking to 
a friend outside the door of his apartment. He threw her down- 
stairs, causing her permanent injury. She obtained a court order 
compelling him to pay her a certain sum (15 thalcrs) even- quarter 
as long as she lived. When at last she died, after twenty years, he 
noted in his account-book: "Obit anus, abit onus." 1 It is hard to 
find in his life evidences of any virtue except kindness to animals, 
which he carried to the point of objecting to vivisection in the 
interests of science. In all other respects he was completely selfish. 
It is difficult to believe that a man who was profoundly convinced 
of the jiiti^e of asceticism and resignation would never have made 
any attempt to embody his convictions in his practice. 

Historically, two things are important about Schopenhauer: his 
pessimism, and his doctrine that will is superior to knowledge. His 
pessimism made it possible for men to take to philosophy without 
having to persuade themselves t&at all evil can be explained away, 
and in this way, as an antidote, it was useful. From a scientific 
1 "The old woman dies, the burden departs/' 

786 



SCHOPENHAUER 

point of view, optimism and pessimism are alike objectionable: 
optimism assumes, or attempts to prove, that the universe exists 
to please us, and pessimism that it exists to displease us. Scien- 
tifically, there is no evidence that it is concerned with us either 
one way or the other. The belief in either pessimism or optimism 
is a matter *of temperament, not of reason, but the optimistic 
temperament has been much commoner among Western philo- 
sophers. A representative of the opposite party is therefore likely 
to be useful in bringing forward considerations which would other- 
wise be overlooked. 

More important than pessimism was the doctrine of the primacy 
of the will. It is obvious that this doctrine has no necessary logical 
connection with pessimism, and those who held it after Schopen- 
hauer frequently found in it a basis for optimism. In one form or 
another, the doctrine that will is paramount has been held I y many 
modern philosophers, notably Nietzsche, Bergson, James, and 
Dcwey. It has, moreover, acquired a vogue outside the circles of 
professional philosophers. And in proportion as will has gone up 
in the scale, knowledge has gone down. This is, I think, the most 
notable change that has come over the temper of philosophy in 
our age. It was prepared by Rousseau and Kant, but was first 
proclaimed in its purity by Schopenhauer. For this reason, in spite 
of inconsistency and a certain shallowness, his philosophy has 
considerable importance as a stage in historical development. 



7*7 



Chapter XXV 
NIETZSCHE 

NIETZSCHE (1844-1900) regarded himself, rightly, as the 
successor of Schopenhauer, to whom, however, he is 
superior in many ways, particularly in the consistency 
and coherence of his doctrine. Schopenhauer's oriental ethic of 
renunciation seems out of harmony with his metaphysic of the 
omnipotence of will ; in Nietzsche, the will has ethical as well as 
metaphysical primacy. Nietzsche, though a professor, was a literary 
rather than an academic philosopher. He invented no new tech- 
nical theories in ontology or epistemology ; his importance is 
primarily in ethics, and secondarily as an acute historical critic. 
I shall confine myself almost entirely to his ethics and his criticism 
of religion, since it was this aspect of his writing that made him 
influential. 

His life was simple. His father was a Protestant pastor, and his 
upbringing was very pious. He was brilliant at the university as 
a classicist and student of philology, so much so that in 1869, 
before he had taken his degree, he was offered a professorship 
of philology at Basel, which he accepted. His health was never 
good, and after periods of sick leave he was obliged to retire fma% 
in 1879. After this, he lived in Switzerland anJ Italy; in 
1888 he became insane, and remained so until his death, lie had 
a passionate admiration for Wagner, but quarrelled with him, 
nominally. over Parsifal, which he thought too Christian and tcx) 
full of renunciation. After the quarrel he critio/cd Wagner 
savagely, and even went so far as to accuse him of being a Jew. 
His general outlook, however, remained very airniUr to that of 
Wagner in the Rtng\ Nietzsche's superman is very like Siegfried, 
except that he knows Greek. This may seem odd, but that in not 
my faftlt. 

Nietzsche was not consciously a romantic; indeed he often 
severely criticizes the romantics. Consciously his outlook was 
Hellenic, but with the Orphic component omitted. He admired the 
pre*Socratics, except Pythagoras. He ha a close affinity to 
Hcraditu*. Aristotle'* magnanimous man IB very like what 
Nietzsche calls the "noble man/' but in the main he regards the 

788 



NIETZSCHE 

Greek philosophers from Socrates onwards as inferior to their 
predecessors. He cannot forgive Socrates for his humble origin; 
he calls him a "roturier," and accuses him of corrupting the noble 
Athenian youth with a democratic moral bias. Plato, especially, 
is condemned on account of his taste for edification. Nietzsche, 
however, Obviously does not quite like condemning him, and sug- 
gests, to excuse him, that perhaps he was insincere, and only 
preached virtue as a means of keeping the lower classes in order. 
He speaks of him on one occasion as "a great Cagliostro." He 
likes Democritus and Epicurus, but his affection for the latter 
seems somewhat illogical, unless it is interpreted as really an 
admiration for Lucretius. 

As might be expected, he has a low opinion of Kant, whom he 
calls "a moral fanatic a la Rousseau." 

In spite of Nietzsche's criticism of the romantics, his rut look 
owes much to them; it is that of aristocratic anarchism, like 
Byron's, and one is not surprised to find him admiring Byron. 
He attempts to combine two sets of values which are not easily 
harmonized: on the one hand he likes ruthlessness, war, and 
aristocratic pride; on the other hand, he loves philosophy and 
literature and the arts, especially music. Historically, these values 
coexisted in the Renaissance; Pope Julius II, fighting for Bologna 
and employing Michelangelo, might be taken as the sort of man 
whom Nietzsche would wish to see in control of governments. It 
is natural to compare Nietzsche with Machiavelli, in spite of 
important differences between the two men. As for the differences: 
Machiavelli was a man of affairs, whose opinions had been formed 
by close contact with public business, and were in harmony with 
his age; he was not pedantic or systematic, and his philosophy 
of politics scarcely forms a coherent whole; Nietzsche, on the 
contrary, was a professor, an essentially bookish man, and a philo- 
sopher in conscious opposition to what appeared to be the domi- 
nant political and ethical trends of his time. The similarities, 
however, go deeper. Nietzsche's political philosophy is Analogous 
to that of The Prince (not The Discourses), though it is worked 
out and applied over a wider field. Both Nietzsche and Machiavelli 
have an ethic which aims at power and is deliberately anti-Chris- 
tian, though Nietzsche is more frank in this respect. What Caesas 
Borgia was to Machiavelli, Napoleon was to Nietzsche: a great 
man defeated by petty opponents. 

789 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

Nietzsche's criticism of religions and philosophies is dominated 
entirely by ethical motives. He admires certain qualities which 
he believes (perhaps rightly) to be only possible for an aristocratic 
minority; the majority, in his opinion, should be only means to 
the excellence of the few, and should not be regarded as having 
any independent claim to happiness or well-being. Fie alludes 
habitually to ordinary human beings as the "bungled and botched/ 9 
and sees no objection to their suffering if it is necessary for the 
production of a great man. Thus the whole importance of the 
period from 1789 to 1815 is summed up in Napoleon: "The 
Revolution made Napoleon possible: that is its justification. We 
ought to desire the anarchical collapse of the whole of our civiliza- 
tion if such a reward were to be its result. Napoleon made national- 
ism possible: that is the latter's excuse." Almost all of the higher 
hopes of this century, he says, are due to Napoleon. 

He is fond of expressing himself paradoxically and with a view 
to shocking conventional readers. He docs this by employing the 
words "good" and "evil" with their ordinary connotations, and 
then saying that he prefers "evil" to "good." His book, Beyond 
Good and Evil, really aims at changing the reader's opinion as to 
what is good and what is evil, but professes, except at moments, 
to be praising what is "evil" and decrying what is "good." He 
says, for instance, that it is a mistake to regard it as a duty to aim 
at the victor}' of good and the annihilation of evil ; this vte\ is 
English, and typical of "that blockhead, John Stuart Mill," a man 
for whom he has a specially virulent contempt. Of him he says: 

"I abhor the man's vulgarity when he says 'What is right for 
one man* is right for another'; 'Do not to others that which you 
would not that they should do unto you.* 1 Such principles would 
fain establish the whole of human traffic upon mutual irrruri, so 
that every action would appear to be a ca&h payment for something 
done to us. The hypothesis here u ignoble to the la*t degree: it 
is taken for granted that there is some sort of cqunalencc in value 
betwfen rlty actions and thine"* 

True virtue, as opposed to the conventional son, is not for all, 
but should remain the characteristic of an aristocratic minority 
It is not profitable or prudent ; it bolate* its potscutor from other 
men; it is hostile to ondcr, amkdoe* harm to inferiors. It is necc*- 

1 I teem to remember that iomcon* anticipated Mill in thi dictum. 
1 In all quotations from Nietzsche, the italics nr in the original 

790 



NIETZSCHE 

sary for higher men to make war upon the masses, and resist the 
democratic tendencies of the age, for in all directions mediocre 
people are joining hands to make themselves masters. "Everything 
that pampers, that softens, and that brings the 'people' or 'woman' 
to the front, operates in favour of universal suffrage that is to 
say, the dominion of 'inferior' men." The seducer was Rousseau, 
who made woman interesting; then came Harriet Beecher Stowe 
and the slaves; then the Socialists with their championship of 
workmen and the poor. All these are to be combated. 

Nietzsche's ethic is not one of self-indulgence in any ordinary 
sense ; he believes in Spartan discipline and the capacity to endure 
as well as inflict pain for important ends. He admires strength of 
will above all things. "I test the power of a will" he says, "according 
to the amount of resistance it can offer and the amount of pain 
and torture it con endure and know how to turn to its own advan- 
tage ; I do not point to the evil and pain of existence with the finger 
of reproach, but rather entertain the hope that life may one day 
become more evil and more full of suffering than it has ever been." 
He regards compassion as a weakness to be combated. "The object 
is to attain that enormous energy of greatness which can model the 
man of the future by means of discipline and also by means of the 
annihilation of millions of the bungled and botched, and which 
ca^ yet avoid going to ruin at the sight of the suffering created 
thereby, the like of which has never been seen before." He 
prophesied with a certain glee an era of great wars; one wonders 
whether he would have been happy if he had lived to see the 
fulfilment of his prophecy. 

He is not, however, a worshipper of the State; far from it. He 
is a passionate individualist, a believer in the hero. The misery of 
a whole nation, he says, is of less importance than the suffering 
of a great individual: "The misfortunes of all these small folk 
do not together constitute a sum-total, except in the feelings of 
mighty men." ; 

Nietzsche is not a nationalist, and shows no excessive admiration 
for Germany. He wants an international ruling race, who are to 
be the lords' of the earth: "a new vast aristocracy based upon the 
most severe self-discipline, in which the will of philosophical men 
of power and artUt-tyrants will 6e stamped upon thousands of 
years." 

He is also not definitely anti-Semitic, though he thinks Germany 

79* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

contains as many Jews as it can assimilate, and ought not to permit 
any further influx of Jews. He dislikes the New Testament, but 
not the Old, of which he speaks in terms of the highest admiration. 
In justice to Nietzsche it must be emphasized that many modern 
developments which have a certain connection with his genera] 
ethical outlook are contrary to his clearly expressed opinions. 

Two applications of his ethic deserve notice: first, his contempt 
for women ; second, his bitter critique of Christianity. 

He is never tired of inveighing against women. In his pseudo- 
prophetical book, Thus Spake Zarathiutra, he says that women are 
not, as yet, capable of friendship; they are still cats, or birds, or 
at best cows. "Man shall be trained for war and woman for the 
recreation of the warrior. All else is folly." The recreation of the 
warrior is to be of a peculiar sort if one may trust his most em- 
phatic aphorism on this subject: **Thou gocst to woman? Do not 
forget thy whip." 

He is not always quite so fierce, though always equally con- 
temptuous. In the Will to Power he says: "We take pleasure in 
woman as in a perhaps daintier, more delicate, and more ethereal 
kind of creature. What a treat it is to meet creatures who have 
only dancing and nonsense and finery in their minds! They have 
always been the delight of every tense and profound male soul." 
However, even these graces are only to be found in women so l^ng 
as they are kept in order by manly men ; as soon as they achieve 
any independence they become intolerable. "Woman has so much 
cause for shame; in woman there is so much pedantry, super- 
ficiality, schoolmasterliness, petty presumption, unbridledness, 
and indiscretion concealed . . . which has really been best res- 
trained and dominated hitherto by the/rar of man." So he says 
in Beyond Good and Evil, where he adds that we should think of 
women as property, as Orientals do. The whole of his abuse of 
women is offered as self-evident truth; it i* not backed up by 
evidence /rom history or from his own experience, which, o far 
as women were concerned, was almost confined to his sister. 

Nietzsche's objection to Christianity is that it caused acceptance 
of what he calls "slave morality." It is curious to observe the 
contrast between his arguments and those of the French philosopher 
who preceded the Revolution. Yhey argued that Christian dogmas 
are untrue; that Christianity teaches submission to what is deemed 
*o be the will of God, whereas self- respecting human beings should 

792 



NIETZSCHE 

not bow before any higher Power; and that the Christian Churches 
have become the a lies of tyrants, and are helping the enemies of 
democracy to deny liberty and continue to grind the faces of the 
poor. Nietzsche is not interested in the metaphysical truth of either 
Christianity or any other religion ; being convinced that no religion 
is really true, he judges all religions entirely by their social effects. 
He agrees with the philosophes in objecting to submission to the 
supposed will of God, but he would substitute for it the will of 
earthly "artist-tyrants." Submission is right, except for these 
supermen, but not submission to the Christian God. As for the 
Christian Churches* being allies of tyrants and enemies of demo- 
cracy, that, he says, is the very reverse of the truth. The French 
Revolution and Socialism are, according to him, essentially iden- 
tical in spirit with Christianity; to all alike he is opposed, and for 
the same reason: that he will not treat all men as equal in any 
respect whatever. 

Buddhism and Christianity, he says, are both "nihilistic" reli- 
gions, in the sense that they deny any ultimate difference of value 
between one man and another, but Buddhism is much the less 
objectionable of the two. Christianity is degenerative, full of 
decaying and excrcmcntal elements ; its driving force is the revolt 
of the bungled and botched. This revolt was begun by the Jews, 
and brought into Christianity by "holy epileptics" like St. Paul, 
wHb had no honesty. "The New Testament is the gospel of a 
completely ignoble species of man." Christianity is the most fatal 
and seductive lie that ever existed. No man of note has ever 
resembled the Christian ideal; consider for instance the heroes 
of Plutarch's Lir. Christianity is to be condemned for denying 
the value of "pride, pathos of distance, great responsibility, 
exuberant spirits, splendid animalism, the instincts of war and of 
conquest, the deification of passion, revenge, anger, voluptuous- 
ness, adventure, knowledge." AH these things are good, and all are 
said by Christianity to l>c bad so Nietzsche contends. ^ t 

Christianity, he argues, aims at taming the heart in man, but 
this is a mistake. A wild beast has a certain splendour, which it 
loses when it is tamed. The criminals with whom Dostoevsky 
associated were better than he was, because they were more self- 
respecting. Nietzsche is nauseated fey repentance and redemption? 
which he calls a/ote circulate. It is difficult for us to free ourselves 
from this way of thinking about human behaviour: "we are heirs 

793 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

to the conscience- vivisection and self-crucifixion of two thousand 
years." There is a very eloquent passage about Pascal, which 
deserves quotation, because it shows Nietzsche's objections to 
Christianity at their best: 

"What is it that we combat in Christianity? Tfcat.it aims at 
destroying the strong, at breaking their spirit, at exploiting their 
moments of weariness and debility, at converting their proud 
assurance into anxiety and conscience-trouble ; that it knows how 
to poison the noblest instincts and to infect them with disease, 
until their strength, their will to power, turns inwards, against 
themselves until the strong perish through their excessive self- 
contempt and self-immolation: that gruesome way of perishing, 
of which Pascal is the most famous example." 

In place of the Christian saint Nietzsche wishes to see what he 
calls the "noble" man, by no means as a universal type, but as 
a governing aristocrat. The "noble" man will be capable of cruelty, 
and, on occasion, of what is vulgarly regarded as crime; he will 
recognize duties only to equals. Me will protect artists and poets 
and all who happen to be masters of some skill, hut he will do so 
as himself a member of a higher order than those who only know 
how to do something. From the example of warriors he will learn 
to associate death with the interests for which he is fighting; to 
sacrifice numbers, and take his cause sufficiently seriously not to 
spare men; to practise inexorable discipline; and to allow him&lf 
violence and cunning in war. He will recognize the part played 
by cruelty in aristocratic excellence: * 'almost even-thing that we 
call 'higher culture* is based upon the spiritualizing and inten- 
sifying of cruelty'' The "noble* 1 man is essentially the incarnate 
will to power. 

What are we to think of Nietzsche's doctrines? 1 low far are they 
true? Are they in any degree useful? I* there in them anything 
objective, or are they the mere power-phantasies of an invalid? 

It js undeniable that Nietzsche has had a great influence, not 
among technical philosophers, but among people of literary and 
artistic culture. It must also be conceded that hi* prophecies a* to 
the future have, so far, proved more nearly right than those of 
liberals or Socialists. // he is a mere symptom of disease, the 
disease must be very widespread in the modern world. 

Nevertheless there is a great deal in him that must be dismissed 
t* merely megalomaniac. Speaking of Spinoza he says: "How much 

794 



NIETZSCHE 

of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a 
sickly recluse betray I" Exactly the same may be said of him, with 
the less reluctance since he has not hesitated to say it of Spinoza. 
It is obvious that in his day-dreams he is a warrior, not a professor; 
all the mefc he admires were military. His opinion of women, like 
every man's, is an objectification of his own emotion towards them, 
which is obviously one of fear. " Forget not thy whip" but nine 
women out of ten would get the whip away from him, and he 
knew it, so he kept away from women, and soothed his wounded 
vanity with unkind remarks. 

He condemns Christian love because he thinks it is an outcome 
of fear: I am afraid my neighbour may injure me, and so I assure 
him that I love him. If I were stronger and bolder, I should openly 
display the contempt for him which of course I feel. It does not 
occur to Nietzsche as possible that a man should genuinely feel 
universal love, obviously because he himself feels almost universal 
hatred and fear, which he would fain disguise as lordly indifference. 
His "noble" man who is himself in day-dreams is a being wholly 
devoid of sympathy, ruthless, cunning, cruel, concerned only with 
his own power. King Lear, on the verge of madness, says: 

I will do such things 

What they are yet I know not hut they snail be 
The terror of the earth. 

This is Nietzsche's philosophy in a nutshell. 

It never occurred to Nietzsche that the lust for power, with 
which he endows his superman, is itself an outcome of fear. Those 
who do not fear their neighbours see no necessity to tyrannize over 
them. Men who have conquered fear have not the frantic quality 
of Nietzsche's "artist-tyrant" Neros, who try to enjoy music and 
massacre while their hearts are filled with dread of the inevitable 
palace revolution. 1 will not deny that, partly as a result of his 
teaching, the real world has become very like his nighfcnart, but 
that docs not make it any the less horrible. 

It must IK admitted that there is a certain type of Christian 
ethic to which Nietzsche's strictures can be justly applied. Pascal 
and Dostocvsky hi* own illustrations have both something 
abject in their virtue. Pascal sacrificed his magnificent mathe- 
matical intellect to his God, thereby attributing to Him a barbarity 
which was a cosmic enlargement of Pascal's morbid mental tor* 

795 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

tures. Dostoevsky would have nothing to do with "proper pride*'; 
he would sin in order to repent and to enjoy the luxury of con- 
fession. I will not argue the question how far such aberrations can 
justly be charged against Christianity, but I will admit that I agree 
with Nietzsche in thinking Dostoevsky's prostration 'contemptible. 
A certain uprightness and pride and even self-assertion of a sort, 
I should agree, are elements in the best character ; no virtue which 
has its roots in fear is much to be admired. 

There are two sorts of saints: the saint by nature, and the saint 
from fear. The saint by nature has a spontaneous love of mankind ; 
he does good because to do so gives him happiness. The saint from 
fear, on the other hand, like the man who only abstains from theft 
because of the police, would be wicked if he were not restrained 
by the thought of hell-fire or of his neighbours' vengeance. 
Nietzsche can only imagine the second son of saint ; he is so full 
of fear and hatred that spontaneous love of mankind seems to him 
impossible. He has never conceived of the man who, with all the 
fearlessness and stubborn pride of the superman, nevertheless does 
not inflict pain because he has no wish to do so. Does anyone 
suppose that Lincoln acted as he did from fear of hell? Yet to 
Nietzsche Lincoln is abject, Napoleon magnificent. 

It remains to consider the main ethical problem raised by 
Nietzsche, namely: should our ethic he aristocratic, or shoulcfrit, 
in some sense, treat all men alike: This is a question which, as I 
have just stated it, has no very clear meaning, and obviously, the 
first step is to try to make the issue more definite. 

We must in the first place try to distinguish an aristocratic ethic 
from an aristocratic political theory. A believer in Bemham's prin- 
ciple of the greatest happiness of the greatest number has a demo- 
cratic ethic, but he may think that the general happiness is best 
promoted by an aristocratic form of government. This is not 
Nietzsche's position. He holds that the happiness of common 
peopfc is fto part of the good pn $t. All that is good or bad in itself 
exists only in the superior few; what happen* to the rest i of no 
account. 

The next question is: How are the superior few defined? In 
practice, they have usually beer a conquering race or a hereditary 
aristocracy and aristocracies have usually been, at least in theory, 
descendants of conquering races. I think Nietzsche would accept 
this definition. "No morality is possible without good birth/' he 

796 



NIETZSCHE 



tells us. He says that the noble caste is always at first barbarian, 
but that every elevation of Man is due to aristocratic society. 

It is not clear whether Nietzsche regards the superiority of the 
aristocrat as congenital or as due to education and environment. 
If the latter, 'it is difficult to defend the exclusion of others from 
advantages for which, ex hypothesi, they are equally qualified. I 
shall therefore assume that he regards conquering aristocracies 
and their descendants as biologically superior to their subjects, 
as men are superior to domestic animals, though in a lesser 
degree. 

What shall we mean by "biologically superior"? We shall mean, 
when interpreting Nietzsche, that individuals of the superior race, 
and their descendants, are more likely to be "noble" in Nietzsche's 
sense: they will have more strength of will, more courage, more 
impulse towards power, less sympathy, less fear, and less gentle- 
ness. 

We can now state Nietzsche's ethic. I think what follows is a 

fair analysis of it: 

Victors in war, and their descendants, are usually biologically 
superior to the vanquished. It is therefore desirable that they should 
hold all the power, and should manage affairs exclusively in their 
own interests. 

JTicre is here still the word "desirable" to be considered. What 
is "desirable" in Nietzsche's philosophy? From the outsider's 
point of view, what Nietzsche calls "desirable" is what Nietzsche 
desires. With this interpretation, Nietzsche's doctrine might be 
stated mure simply and honestly in the one sentence: i'l wish I 
had lived in the Athens of Pericles or the Florence of the Medici. 
But this is not a philosophy ; it is a biographical fact about a certain 
individual. The word "desirable" is not synonymous with desired 
by me"; it has some claim, however shadowy, to legislate univer- 
sally. A theist may say that what is desirable is what God desires, 
but Nietzsche cannot say this. He could say that he kllows what 
is good by an ethical intuition, but he will not say this, because 
it sounds too Kantian. What he can say, as an expansion of the 
word "desirable," is this: "If men will read my works, a certain 
percentage of them will come to tfiare my desires as regards th* 
organization of society; these men, inspired by the energy and 
determination which my philosophy will give them, can preserve 
and restore aristocracy, with themselves as aristocrats or (like mef 

797 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

sycophants of aristocracy. In this way they will achieve a fuller 
life than they can have as servants of the people/' 

There is another element in Nietzsche, which is closely akin to 
the objection urged by "rugged individualists" against trade- 
unions. In a fight of all against all, the victor is likely <o possess 
certain qualities which Nietzsche admires, such as courage, re- 
sourcefulness, and strength of mil. But if the men who do not 
possess these aristocratic qualities (who are the vast majority) 
band themselves together, they may win in spite of their individual 
inferiority. In this fight of the collective canaille against the aris- 
tocrats, Christianity is the ideological front, as the French Revo- 
lution was the fighting front. We ought therefore to oppose every 
kind of union among the individually feeble, for fear lest their 
combined power should outweigh that of the individually strong; 
on the other hand, we ought to promote union among the tough 
and virile elements of the population. The first step towards the 
creation of such a union is the preaching of Nietzsche's philosophy. 
It will be seen that it is not easy to preserve the distinction between 
ethics and politics. 

Suppose we wish- as I certainly do -to find arguments against 
Nietzsche's ethics and politics, what arguments can we find ? 

There are weighty practical arguments, showing that the attempt 
to secure his ends will in fact secure something quite differqpt. 
Aristocracies of birth are nowadays discredited; the only prac- 
ticable form of aristocracy is an organization like the Fascist or 
the Nazi party. Such an organization rouses opposition, and is 
likely to be defeated in war ; but if it is not defeated it must, before 
long, become nothing but a police State, where the rulers live 
in terror of assassination, and the heroes are in concentration 
camps. In such a community faith and honour are sapped by 
delation, and the would-be aristocracy of supermen degenerates 
into a clique of trembling poltroons. 

Thiae, However, are arguments for our time; they would not 
have held good in past ages, when aristocracy was unquestioned. 
The Egyptian government was conducted on Ntetzschcan prin- 
ciples for several millennia. The governments of almost all large 
States were aristocratic until tlje American and the French Revo- 
lutions. We have therefore to ask ourselves whether there is any 
good reason for preferring democracy to a form of government 
which has had such a long and successful history or rather, since 

798 



NIETZSCHE 

we are concerned with philosophy, not politics, whether there are 
objective grounds for rejecting the ethic by which Nietzsche 
supports aristocracy. 

The ethical, as opposed to the political, question is one as to 
sympathy.JSypipalhy, in the sense of being made unhappy by the 
suffering of others, is to some extent natural to human beings; 
young children are troubled when they hear other children crying. 
But the development of this feeling is very different in different 
people. Some find pleasure in the infliction of torture ; others, like 
Buddha, feel that they cannot be completely happy so long as any 
living thing is suffering. Most people divide mankind emotionally 
into friends and enemies, feeling sympathy for the former, but not 
for the latter. An ethic such as that of Christianity or Buddhism 
has its emotional basis in universal sympathy; Nietzsche's, in a 
complete absence of sympathy. (He frequently preaches against 
sympathy, and in this respect one feels that he has no difficulty 
in obeying his own precepts.) The question is: If Buddha and 
Nietzsche were confronted, could either produce any argument 
that ought to appeal to the impartial listener? I am not thinking 
of political arguments. We can imagine them appearing before the 
Almighty, as in the first chapter of the Book of Job, and offering 
advice as to the sort of world He should create. What could 
either say ? 

Buddha would open the argument by speaking of the lepers, 
outcast and miserable; the poor, toiling with aching limbs and 
barely kept alive by scanty nourishment; the wounded in battle, 
dying in slow agony; the orphans, ill-treated by cruel guardians; 
and even the most successful haunted by the thought bf failure 
and death. From all this load of sorrow, he would say, a way of 
salvation must be found, and salvation can only come through love. 

Nietzsche, whom only Omnipotence could restrain from inter- 
rupting, would burst out when his turn came: "Good heavens, 
man, you must learn to be of tougher fibre. Why go about snivelling 
because trivial people suffer? Or, for that matter, because great 
men suffer? Trivial people suffer trivially, great men suffer greatly, 
and great sufferings are not to be regretted, because they are noble. 
Your ideal is a purely negative one, absence of suffering, which 
can be completely secured by non-existence. I, on the other hand? 
have positive ideals: I admire Alcibiades, and the Emperor 
Frederick II, and Napoleon. For the sake of such men, any misery, 

799 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

13 worth while. I appeal to You, Lord, as the greatest of creative 
artists, do not let Your artistic impulses be curbed by the degene- 
rate fear-ridden maunderings of this wretched psychopath." 

Buddha, who in the courts of Heaven has learnt all history since 
his death, and has mastered science with delight in the knowledge 
and sorrow at the use to which men have put it, replies with calm 
urbanity: "You are mistaken, Professor Nietzsche, in thinking my 
ideal a purely negative one. True, it includes a negative clement, 
the absence of suffering; but it has in addition quite as much that 
is positive as is to be found in your doctrine. Though I have no 
special admiration for Alcibiadcs and Napoleon, I, too, have my 
heroes: my successor Jesus, because he told men to love their 
enemies; the men who discovered how to master the forces of 
nature and secure food with less labour; the medical men who 
have shown how to diminish disease; the poets and artists and 
musicians who have caught glimpses of the Divine beatitude. Love 
and knowledge and delight in beauty are not negations ; they are 
enough to fill the lives of the greatest men that have ever lived." 

"All the same," Nietzsche replies, "your world would be insipid. 
You should study Heraclitus, whose works survive complete in the 
celestial library. Your love is compassion, which is elicited by pain ; 
your truth, if you are honest, is unpleasant, and only to be known 
through suffering; and as to beauty, what is more beautiful than the 
tiger, who owes his splendour to his fierceness? No, if the Lord 
should decide for your world, I fear we should all die of boredom." 

" You might," Buddha replies, "because you love pain, and your 
love of life is a sham. But those who really love life would be 
happy as 'no one can be happy in the world as it is." 

For my part, I agree with Buddha as I have imagined him. But 
I do not know how to prove that he is right by any arguments such 
as can be used in a mathematical or a scientific question. I dislike 
Nietzsche because he likes the contemplation of pain, because he- 
erects conceit into a duty, because the men whom he most admires 
are conquerors, whose glory is cleverness in causing men to die. 
But I think the ultimate argument against his philosophy, as 
against any unpleasant but internally self-consistent ethic, lies not 
in an appeal to facts, but in an appeal to the emotions. Nietzsche 
despises universal love; I feel it the motive power to all that I 
desire as regards the world. His followers have had their innings* 
but we may hope that it it coming rapidly to an end. 

Ron 



Chapter XXVI 
THE UTILITARIANS 1 

THROUGHOUT the period from Kant to Nietzsche, pro- 
fesional philosophers in Great Britain remained almost 
completely unaffected by their German contemporaries, 
with the sole exception of Sir William Hamilton, who had little 
influence. Coleridge and Carlyle, it is true, were profoundly 
affected by Kant, Fichte, and the German Romantics, but they 
were not philosophers in the technical sense. Somebody seems 
to have once mentioned Kant to James Mill, who, after a cursory 
inspection, remarked: "I see well enough what poor Kant would 
be at." But this degree of recognition is exceptional; in general, 
there is complete silence about the Germans. Bentham and his 
school derived their philosophy, in all its main outlines, from 
Locke, Hartley, and Helvetius; their importance is not so much 
philosophical as political, as the leaders of British radicalism, and 
as the men who unintentionally prepared the way for the doctrines 
of socialism. 

Jeremy Bentham, who was the recognized leader of the "Philo- 
sophical Radicals," was not the sort of man one expects to find 
at^he head of a movement of this sort. He was born in 1748, but 
did not become a Radical till 1808. He was painfully shy, and 
could not without great trepidation endure the company of stran- 
gers. He wrote voluminously, but never bothered to publish; what 
was published under his name had been benevolently 'purloined 
by his friends. His main interest was jurisprudence, in which he 
recognized Helvetius and Beccaria as his most important pre- 
decessors. It was through the theory of law that he became in- 
terested in ethics and politics. 

He bases his whole philosophy on two principles, the "as^ocia- 
tion principle," and the "greatest-happiness principle. The asso- 
ciation principle had been emphasized by Hartley in 1749; before 
him, though association of ideas was recognized as occurring, it 
was regarded, for instance by Locke, only as a source of trivial 
errors. Bentham, following Hartley, made it the basic principle 

1 For a fuller treatment of this subject, as also of Marx, see Part II of 
my Freedom and Organization, 1814-2914. 

//iifriry o/ Wait** PktoMpkv 8O I 20 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

is worth while. I appeal to You, Lord, as the greatest of creative 
artists, do not let Your artistic impulses be curbed by the degene- 
rate fear-ridden maunderings of this wretched psychopath." 

Buddha, who in the courts of Heaven has learnt all history since 
his death, and has mastered science with delight in the knowledge 
and sorrow at the use to which men have put it, replies with calm 
urbanity: "You are mistaken, Professor Nietzsche, in thinking my 
ideal a purely negative one. True, it includes a negative element, 
the absence of suffering; but it has in addition quite as much that 
is positive as is to be found in your doctrine. Though I have no 
special admiration for Alcibiades and Napoleon, I, too, have my 
heroes : my successor Jesus, because he told men to love their 
enemies; the men who discovered how to master the forces of 
nature and secure food with less labour; the medical men who 
have shown how to diminish disease; the poets and artists and 
musicians who have caught glimpses of the Divine beatitude. Love 
and knowledge and delight in beauty are not negations ; they are 
enough to fill the lives of the greatest men that have ever lived." 

"All the same," Nietzsche replies, "your world would be insipid. 
You should study Heraclitus, whose works survive complete in the 
celestial library. Your love is compassion, which is elicited by pain ; 
your truth, if you are honest, is unpleasant, and only to be known 
through suffering ; and as to beauty, what is more beautiful than the 
tiger, who owes his splendour to his fierceness? No, if the Lcrd 
should decide for your world, I fear we should all die of boredom." 

"You might," Buddha replies, "because you love pain, and your 
love of life is a sham. But those who really love life would be 
happy as 'no one can be happy in the world as it is." 

For my part, I agree with Buddha as I have imagined him. But 
I do not know how to prove that he is right by any arguments such 
as can be used in a mathematical or a scientific question. I dislike 
Nietzsche because he likes the contemplation of pain, because he 
erects conceit into a duty, because the men whom he most admires 
are conquerors, whose glory is cleverness in causing men to die. 
But I think the ultimate argument against his philosophy, as 
against any unpleasant but internally self-consistent ethic, lies not 
in an appeal to facts, but in an appeal to the emotions. Nietzsche 
despises universal* love; I feel it the motive power to all that I 
desire as regards the world. His followers have had their innings, 
but we may hope that it is coming rapidly to an end. 

800 



Chapter XXVI 

THE UTILITARIANS 1 



THROUGHOUT the period from Kant to Nietzsche, pro- 
fesional philosophers in Great Britain remained almost 
completely unaffected by their German contemporaries, 
with the sole exception of Sir William Hamilton, who had little 
influence. Coleridge and Carlyle, it is true, were profoundly 
affected by Kant, Fichte, and the German Romantics, but they 
were not philosophers in the technical sense. Somebody seems 
to have once mentioned Kant to James Mill, who, after a cursory 
inspection, remarked: "I see well enough what poor Kant would 
be at." But this degree of recognition is exceptional; in general, 
there is complete silence about the Germans. Bentham and his 
school derived their philosophy, in all its main outlines, from 
Locke, Hartley, and Hclvetius; their importance is not so much 
philosophical as political, as the leaders of British radicalism, and 
as the men who unintentionally prepared the way for the doctrines 
of socialism. 

Jeremy Bentham, who was the recognized leader of the "Philo- 
sophical Radicals," was not the sort of man one expects to find 
at^he head of a movement of this sort. He was born in 1748, but 
did not become a Radical till 1808. He was painfully shy, and 
could not without great trepidation endure the company of stran- 
gers. He wrote voluminously, but never bothered to publish; what 
was published under his name had been benevolently 'purloined 
by his friends. His main interest was jurisprudence, in which he 
recognized Hclvetius and Beccaria as his most important pre- 
decessors. It was through the theory of law that he became in- 
terested in ethics and politics. 

He bases his whole philosophy on two principles, the "a^ocia- 
tion principle," and the " greatest-happiness principle. The asso- 
ciation principle had been emphasized by Hartley in 1749; before 
him, though association of ideas was recognized as occurring, it 
was regarded, for instance by Locke, only as a source of trivial 
errors. Bentham, following Hartley, made it the basic principle 

1 For a fuller treatment of this subject, as also of Marx, see Pan II of 
my Freedom and Organisation, 1814-1914. , 

8O I 2C 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of psychology. He recognizes association of ideas and language, 
and also association of ideas and ideas. By means of this principle 
he aims at a deterministic account of mental occurrences. In 
essence the doctrine is the same as the more modern theory of 
the "conditioned reflex," based on Pavlov's experiments.. The only 
important difference is that Pavlov's conditioned reflex is physiolo- 
gical, whereas the association of ideas was purely mental. Pavlov's 
work is therefore capable of a materialistic explanation, such as 
is given to it by the behaviourists, whereas the association of ideas 
led rather towards a psychology more or less independent of 
physiology. There can be no doubt that, scientifically, the principle 
of the conditioned reflex is an advance on the older principle. 
Pavlov's principle is this: Given a reflex according to which a 
stimulus B produces a reaction C, and given that a certain animal 
has frequently experienced a stimulus A at the same time as B, 
it often happens that in time the stimulus A will produce the 
reaction C even when B is absent. To determine the circumstances 
under which this happens is a matter of experiment. Clearly, if 
we substitute ideas for A, B, and C, Pavlov's principle becomes 
that of the association of ideas. 

Both principles, indubitably, are valid over a certain field ; the 
only controversial question is as to the extent of this field. Bentham 
and his followers exaggerated the extent of the field in the case 
of Hartley's principle, as certain behaviourists have in the dfee 
of Pavlov's principle. 

To Bentham, determinism in psychology was important, because 
he wished to establish a code of laws and, more generally, a 
social system which would automatically make men virtuous. 
His second principle, that of the greatest happiness, became 
necessary at this point in order to define "virtue." 

Bentham maintained that what is good is pleasure or happiness 
he used these words as synonyms and what is bad is pain. 
Therefore one state of affairs is better than another if it involves 
a greater balance of pleasure over pain, or a smaller balance of 
pain over pleasure. Of all possible states of affairs, that one is best 
which involves the greatest balance of pleasure over pain. 

There is nothing new in this doctrine, which came to be called 
"Utilitarianism." It had been advocated by Hutcheson as early as 
1725. Bentham attributes it to Priestley, who, however, had no 
Special claim to it. It is virtually contained in Locke. Bcntham's 

802 



THE UTILITARIANS 

merit consisted, not in the doctrine, but in his vigorous application 
of it to various practical problems. 

Bentham held not only that the good is happiness in general, but 
also that each individual always pursues what he believes to be his 
own happiness. The business of the legislator, therefore, is to 
produce harmony between public and private interests. It is to the 
interest of the public that I should abstain from theft, but it is 
not to my interest except where there is an effective criminal law. 
Thus the criminal law is a method of making the interests of 
the individual coincide with those of the community; that is its 
justification. 

Men are to be punished by the criminal law in order to prevent 
crime, not because we hate the criminal. It is more important that 
the punishment should be certain than that it should be severe. In 
his day, in England, many quite minor offences were subject to the 
death penalty, with the result that juries often refused to convict 
because they thought the penalty excessive. Bentham advocated 
abolition of the death penalty for all but the worst offences, and 
before he died the criminal law had been mitigated in this respect. 

Civil law, he says, should have four aims: subsistence, abun- 
dance, security, and equality. It will be observed that he does not 
mention liberty. In fact, he cared little for liberty. He admired 
th^ benevolent autocrats who preceded the French Revolution 
Catherine the Great and the Emperor Francis. He had a great 
contempt for the doctrine of the rights of man. The rights of man, 
he said, are plain nonsense; the imprescriptible rights of man, 
nonsense on stilts. When the French revolutionaries ipade their 
"Declaration des droits de l*homme," Bentham called it "a meta- 
physical work the ne plus ultra of metaphysics." Its articles, he 
said, could he divided into three classes: (i) Those that are un- 
intelligible, (2) those that are false, (3) those that are both. 

Bent ham's ideal, like that of Epicurus, was security, not liberty. 
"Wars and storms are best to read of, but peace andcalms are 
better to endure." 

His gradual evolution towards Radicalism had two sources: on 
the one hand, a belief in equality, deduced from the calculus of 
pleasures and pains ; on the other hand, an inflexible determination 
to submit everything to the arbitrament of reason as he under- 
stood it. His love of equality early led him to advocate equal 
division of a man's property among his children, and to oppose 

803 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

testamentary freedom. In later years it led him to oppose monarchy 
and hereditary aristocracy, and to advocate complete democracy, 
including votes for women. His refusal to believe without rational 
grounds led him to reject religion, including belief in God; it 
made him keenly critical of absurdities and anomalies in the law, 
however venerable their historical origin. He would not excuse 
anything on the ground that it was traditional. From early youth 
he was opposed to imperialism, whether that of the British in 
America, or that of other nations ; he considered colonies a folly. 

It was through the influence of James Mill that Bentham was 
induced to take sides in practical politics. James Mill was twenty- 
five years younger than Bentham, and an ardent disciple of his 
doctrines, but he was also an active Radical. Bentham gave Mill 
a house (which had belonged to Milton), and assisted him finan- 
cially while he wrote a history of India. When this history was 
finished, the East India Company gave James Mill a post, as they 
did afterwards to his son until their abolition as a sequel to the 
Mutiny. James Mill greatly admired Condorcet and Hclvetius. 
Like all Radicals of that period, he believed in the omnipotence of 
education. He practised his theories on his son John Stuart Mill, 
with results partly good, partly bad. The most important bad 
result was that John Stuart could never quite shake off his influence, 
even when he perceived that his father's outlook had been narrow. 

James Mill, like Bentham, considered pleasure the only good 
and pain the only evil. But like Epicurus he valued moderate 
pleasure most. He thought intellectual enjoyments the best, and 
temperance the chief virtue. "The intense was with him a bye- 
word of scornful disapprobation," says his son, who adds that he 
objected to the modern stress laid upon feeling, Like the whole 
utilitarian school, he was utterly opposed to every form of roman- 
ticism. He thought politics could be governed by reason, and 
expected men's opinions to be determined by the weight of 
evidence.! If opposing sides in a controversy are presented with 
equal skill, there is a moral certaintyso he held -that the greater 
number will judge right. His outlook was limited by the poverty 
of his emotional nature, but within his limitations he had the 
pieritt of industry, disinterestedness, and rationality. 

His son John Stuart Mill, who was born in 1806, carried on a 
somewhat softened form of the Benthamite doctrine to the time 
rf his death in 1873. 



THE UTILITARIANS 

Throughout the middle portion of the nineteenth century, the 
influence of the Benthamites on British legislation and policy 
was astonishingly great, considering their complete absence of 
emotional appeal. 

Benthafn advanced various arguments in favour of the view 
that the general happiness is the summum bonum. Some of these 
arguments were acute criticisms of other ethical theories. In his 
treatise on political sophisms he says, in language which seems to 
anticipate Marx, that sentimental and ascetic moralities serve the 
interests of the governing class, and are the product of an aristo- 
cratic regime. Those who teach the morality of sacrifice, he con- 
tinues, are not victims of error: they want others to sacrifice to 
them. The moral order, he says, results from equilibrium of 
interests. Governing corporations pretend that there is already 
identity of interests between the governors and the governed, but 
reformers make it clear that this identity does not yet exist, and 
try to bring it about. He maintains that only the principle of 
utility can give a criterion in morals and legislation, and lay the 
foundation of a social science. His main positive argument in 
favour of his principle is that it is really implied by apparently 
different ethical systems. This, however, is only made plausible 
by a severe restriction of his survey. 

<f here is an obvious lacuna in Bentham's system. If every man 
always pursues his own pleasure, how are we to secure that the 
legislator shall pursue the pleasure of mankind in general? 
Bentham's own instinctive benevolence (which his psychological 
theories prevented him from noticing) concealed the* problem 
from him. If he had been employed to draw up a code of laws for 
some country, he would have framed his proposals in what he 
conceived to be the public interest, not so as to further his own 
interests or (consciously) the interests of his class. But if he had 
recognized this fact, he would have had to modify his psychological 
doctrines. He seems to have thought that, by means of cfemocracy 
combined with adequate supervision, legislators could be so con- 
trolled that they could only further their private interests by 
being useful to the general public. There was in his day not much 
material for forming a judgment a to the working of democratic? 
institutions, and his optimism was therefore perhaps excusable, 
but in our more disillusioned age it seems somewhat naive. 

John Stuart Mill, in his Utilitarianism* offers an argument 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

which is so fallacious that it is hard to understand how he can 
have thought it valid. He says: Pleasure is the only thing desired; 
therefore pleasure is the only thing desirable. He argues that the 
only things visible are things seen, the only things audible are 
things heard, and similarly the only things desirable are things 
desired. He does not notice that a thing is "visible" if it can be 
seen, but "desirable" if it ought to be desired. Thus "desirable" 
is a word presupposing an ethical theory; we cannot infer what is 
desirable from what is desired. 

Again: if each man in fact and inevitably pursues his own 
pleasure, there is no point in saying he ought to do something 
else. Kant urged that "you ought" implies "you can"; conversely, 
if you cannot, it is futile to say you ought. // each man must 
always pursue his own pleasure, ethics is reduced to prudence: 
you may do well to further the interests of others in the hope 
that they in turn will further yours. Similarly in politics all co- 
operation is a matter of log-rolling. From the premisses of the 
utilitarians no other conclusion in validly deducible. 

There are two distinct questions involved. First, does each man 
pursue his own happiness? Second, is the general happiness the 
right end of human action ? 

When it is said that each man desires his own happiness, the 
statement is capable of two meanings, of which one is a truism 
and the other is false. Whatever I may happen to desire, I shall 
get some pleasure from achieving my wish; in this sense, what- 
ever I desire is a pleasure, and it may be said, though somewhat 
loosely, that pleasures are what I desire. This is the sense of the 
doctrine which is a truism. 

But if what is meant is that, when I desire anything, I desire it 
because of the pleasure that it will give me, that is usually untrue. 
When I am hungry I desire food, and so long as my hunger 
persists food will give me pleasure. But the hunger, which is a 
desire, comes first; the pleasure is a consequence of the desire. 
I do not deny that there are occasions when there is a direct 
desire for pleasure. If you have decided to devote a free evening 
to the theatre, you mil choose the theatre that you think will give 
you the most pleasure. But the actions thus determined by the 
direct desire for pleasure are exceptional and unimportant. 
Everybody's main activities are determined by desires which art 
anterior to the calculation of pleasures and pains. 

806 



THE UTILITARIANS 

Anything whatever may be an object of desire; a masochist may 
desire his own pain. The masochist, no doubt, derives pleasure 
from the pain that he has desired, but the pleasure is because of the 
desire, not vice versa. A man may desire something that does not 
affect him personally except because of his desire for instance, 
the victory of one side in a war in which his country is neutral. 
He may desire an increase of general happiness, or a mitigation 
of general suffering. Or he may, like Carlyle, desire the exact 
opposite. As his desires vary, so do his pleasures. 

Ethics is necessary because men's desires conflict. The primary 
cause of conflict is egoism: most people are more interested in 
their own welfare than in that of other people. But conflicts are 
equally possible where there is no element of egoism. One man 
may wish everybody to be Catholic, another may wish everybody 
to be Calvinist. Such non-egoistic desires are frequently involved 
in social conflicts. Ethics has a twofold purpose: first, to find a 
criterion by which to distinguish good and bad desires; second, 
by means of praise and blame, to promote good desires and 
discourage such as are bad. 

The ethical part of the utilitarian doctrine, which is logically 
independent of the psychological part, says: Those desires and 
those actions are good which in fact promote the general happiness. 
Ttys need not be the intention of an action, but only its effect. Is 
there any valid theoretical argument either for or against this 
doctrine? We found ourselves faced with a similar question in 
relation to Nietzsche. His ethic differs from that of the utilitarians, 
since it holds that only a minority of the human race have ethical 
importance the happiness or unhappiness of the remainder 
should be ignored. I do not myself believe that this disagreement 
can be dealt with by theoretical arguments such as might be used 
in a scientific question. Obviously those who are excluded from 
the Nietzschean aristocracy will object, and thus the issue becomes 
political rather than theoretical. The utilitarian ethic is democratic 
and anti-romantic. Democrats are likely to accept it, but those 
who like a more Byronic view of the world can, in my opinion, 
be refuted only practically, not by considerations which appeal 
only to facts as opposed to desires. ft 

The Philosophical Radicals were a transitional school. Their 
system gave birth to two others, of more importance than itself, 
namely Darwinism and Socialism. Darwinism was an application 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

to the whole of animal and vegetable life of Malthus's theory of 
population, which was an integral part of the politics and econo- 
mics of the Benthamites a global free competition, in which 
victory went to the animals that most resembled successful 
capitalists. Darwin himself was influenced by Mai thus, and was 
in general sympathy with the Philosophical Radicals. There was, 
however, a great diilerence between the competition admired by 
orthodox economists and the struggle for existence which Darwin 
proclaimed as the motive force of evolution. "Free competition," 
in orthodox economics, is a very artificial conception, hedged in 
by legal restrictions. You may undersell a competitor, but you 
must not murder him. You must not use the armed forces of the 
State to help you to get the better of foreign manufacturers. 
Those who have not the good fortune to possess capital must not 
seek to improve their lot by revolution. "Free competition, 11 as 
understood by the Benthamites, was by no means really free. 

Darwinian competition was not of this limited sort ; there were 
no rules against hitting below the belt. The framework of law 
does not exist among animals, nor is war excluded as a competitive 
method. The use of the State to secure victor}' in competition 
was against the rules as conceived by the Benthamites, but could 
not be excluded from the Darwinian struggle. In fact, though 
Darwin himself was a Liberal, and though Nietzsche never rr^n- 
tions him except with contempt, Darwin's "Survival of the 
Fittest" led, when thoroughly assimilated, to something much 
more like Nietzsche's philosophy than like Bentham's. These 
developments, however, belong to a later period, since Darwin's 
Origin of Species was published in 1859, and its political impli- 
cations were not at first perceived. 

Socialism, on the contrary, began in the heyday of Benthamism, 
and as a direct outcome of orthodox economics. Ricardo, who was 
intimately associated with Bentham, Malthus, and James Mill, 
taught that the exchange value of a commodity is entirely due to 
the labour expended in producing it. He published this theory 
in 1817, and eight years later Thomas Hodgskin, an ex-naval 
officer, published the first Socialist rejoinder, Labour Defended 
Against the Chums of Capital, (le argued that if, as Ricardo taught, 
all value is conferred by labour, then all the reward ought to go 
to labour; the share at present obtained by the landowner and the 
' capitalist must be mere extortion. Meanwhile Robert Owen, after 

808 



THE UTILITARIANS 

much practical experience as a manufacturer, had become con- 
vinced of the doctrine which soon came to be called Socialism. 
(The first use of the word "Socialist" occurs in 1827, when it is 
applied to the followers of 'Owen .) Machinery, he said, was dis- 
placing Igbotir, and laisser-faire gave the working classes no 
adequate means of combating mechanical power. The method 
which he proposed for dealing with the evil was the earliest form 
of modern Socialism. 

Although Owen was a friend of Bentham, who had invested a 
considerable sum of money in Owen's business, the Philosophical 
Radicals did not like his new doctrines; in fact, the advent of 
Socialism made them less Radical and less philosophical than they 
had been. Hodgskin secured a certain following in London, and 
James Mill was horrified. He wrote: 

14 Their notions of property look ugly; . . . they seem to think 
that it should not exist, and that the existence of it is an evil to 
them. Rascals, I have no doubt, are at work among them. . . . 
The fools, not to see that what they madly desire would be such 
a calamity to them as no hands but their own could bring upon 
them." 

This letter, written in 1831, may be taken as the beginning of 
the long war between Capitalism and Socialism. In a later letter, 
James Mill attributes the doctrine to the "mad nonsense" of 
H&dgskin, and adds: "These opinions if they were to spread, 
would be the subversion of civilized society; worse than the 
overwhelming deluge of Huns and Tartars." 

Socialism, in so far as it is only political or economic, does not 
come within the purview of a history of philosophy. But in the 
hands of Karl Marx Socialism acquired a philosophy. His 
philosophy will be considered in the next chapter. 



809 



Chapter XXVII 
KARL MARX 

i 

KARL MARX is usually thought of as the man who claimed 
to have made Socialism scientific, and who did more than 
anyone else to create the powerful movement which, by 
attraction and repulsion, has dominated the recent history of 
Europe. It does not come within the scope of the present work to 
consider his economics, or his politics except in ' certain general 
aspects; it is only as a philosopher, and an influence on the philo- 
sophy of others, that I propose to deal with him. In this respect 
he is difficult to classify. In one aspect, he is an outcome, like 
Hodgskin, of the Philosophical Radicals, continuing their rational- 
ism and their opposition to the romantics. In another aspect he is a 
revivifier of materialism, giving it a new interpretation and a 
new connection with human history. In yet another aspect he is 
the last of the great system-builders, the successor of Hegel, a 
believer, like him, in a rational formula summing up the evolution 
of mankind. Emphasis upon any one of these aspects at the 
expense of the others gives a false and distorted view of his 
philosophy. 

The events of his life in part account for this complexity. He 
was born in 1818, at Trcves, like St. Ambrose. Treves had been 
profoundly influenced by the French during the revolutionary 
and Napoleonic era, and was much more cosmopolitan in outlook 
than most parts of Germany. His ancestors had been rabbis, but 
his parents became Christian when he was a child. He married 
a gentile aristocrat, to whom he remained devoted throughout 
his life. At the university he was influenced by the still prevalent 
Hegelianism, as also by Feuerbach's revolt against Hegel towards 
matecalisgi. He tried journalism, but the Rheinischc Zeitung, 
which he edited, was suppressed by the authorities for its radical- 
ism. After this, in 1843, he went to France to study Socialism. 
There he met Engels, who was the manager of a factory in 
Manchester. Through him he came to know English labour 
conditions and English econoriiics. He thus acquired, before the 
revolutions of 1848, an unusually international culture. So far as 
^Western Europe was concerned, he showed no national bias. 

810 



KARL MARX 

This cannot be said of Eastern Europe, for he always despised 
the Slavs. 

He took part in both the French and the German revolutions 
of 1848, but the reaction compelled him to seek refuge in England 
in 1849. He spent the rest of his life, with a few brief intervals, in 
London* trdubled by poverty, illness, and the deaths of children, 
but nevertheless indefatigably writing and amassing knowledge. 
The stimulus to his work was always the hope of the social 
revolution, if not in his lifetime, then in some not very distant 
future. 

Marx, like Bentham and James Mill, will have nothing to do 
with romanticism; it is always his intention to be scientific. His 
economics is an outcome of British classical economics, changing 
only the motive force. Classical economists, consciously or un- 
consciously, aimed at the welfare of the capitalist, as opposed 
both to the landowner and to the wage-earner; Marx, on the 
contrary, set to work to represent the interest of the wage-earner. 
He had in youth as appears in the Communist Manifesto of 
1848 the fire and passion appropriate to a new revolutionary 
movement, as liberalism had had in the time of Milton. But he 
was always anxious to appeal to evidence, and never relied upon 
any extra-scientific intuition. 

He called himself a materialist, but not of the eighteenth- 
century sort. His sort, which, under Hegelian influence, he called 
"dialectical," differed in an important way from traditional 
materialism, and was more akin to what is now called instru- 
mcntalism. The older materialism, he said, mistakenly regarded 
sensation as passive, and thus attributed activity primarily to the 
object. In Marx's view, all sensation or perception is an inter-, 
action between subject and object ; the bare object, apart from the 
activity of the percipient, is a mere raw material, which is trans- 
formed in the process of becoming known. Knowledge in the 
old sense of passive contemplation is an unreal abstraction; 
the process that really takes place is one of handling \hings. 
"The question whether objective truth belongs to human think- 
ing is not a question of theory, but a practical question," 
he says. "The truth, i.e. the reality and power, of thought must 
be demonstrated in practice. t The contest as to the realky 
or non-reality of a thought which is isolated from practice, 
is a purely scholastic question. . . . Philosophers have only 

8xi 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

interpreted the world in various ways, but the real task is to 
alter it." 1 

I think we may interpret Marx as meaning that the process 
which philosophers have called the pursuit of knowledge is not, 
as has been thought, one in which the object is constant while all 
the adaptation is on the part of the knower. On the 'contrary, 
both subject and object, both the knower and the thing known, 
are in a continual process of mutual adaptation. He calls the 
process "dialectical" because it is never fully completed. 

It is essential to this theory to deny the reality of "sensation" 
as conceived by British empiricists. What happens, when it is 
most nearly what they mean by "sensation," would be better 
called "noticing," which implies activity. In factso Marx would 
contend we only notice things as part of the process of acting 
with reference to them, and any theory which leaves out action 
is a misleading abstraction. 

So far as I know, Marx was the first philosopher who criticized 
the notion of "truth" from this activist point of view. In him this 
criticism was not much emphasized, and I shall therefore say 
no more about it here, leaving the examination of the theory to a 
later chapter. 

Marx's philosophy of history is a blend of Hegel and British 
economics. Like Hegel, he thinks that the world develops accord- 
ing to a dialectical formula, but he totally disagrees with Heg;l 
as to the motive force of this development. Hegel believed in a 
mystical entity called "Spirit," which causes human history to 
develop according to the stages of the dialectic as set forth in 
Hegel's Logic. Why Spirit has to go through these stages is not 
clear. One is tempted to suppose that Spirit is trying to under- 
stand Hegel, and at each stage rashly objectifies what it has been 
reading. Marx's dialectic has none of this quality except a certain 
inevitableness. For Marx, matter, not spirit, is the driving force. 
But it is matter in the peculiar sense that we have been considering, 
not tM whtlly dehumanized matter of the atomists. This means 
that, for Marx, the driving force is really man's relation to matter, 
of which the most important part is his mode of production. In 
this way Marx's materialism, in practice, becomes economics. 

The politics, religion, philosophy, and ait of any epoch in human 
history arc, according to Marx, an outcome of its methods of pro* 
1 Eleven These* on Feverbach, 1845. 
8l2 



KARL MARX 

duction, and, to a lesser extent, of distribution. I think he would 
not maintain that this applies to all the niceties of culture, but 
only to its broad outlines. The doctrine is called the "materialist 
conception of history." This is a very important thesis; in par- 
ticular, it,cogcerns the historian of philosophy. I do not myself 
accept the thesis as it stands, but I think that it contains very 
important elements of truth, and I am aware that it has influenced 
my own views of philosophical development as set forth in the 
present work. Let us, to begin with, consider the history of 
philosophy in relation to Marx's doctrine. 

Subjectively, every philosopher appears to himself to be 
engaged in the pursuit of something which may be called "truth." 
Philosophers may differ as to the definition of "truth," but at any 
rate it is something objective, something which, in some sense, 
everybody ought to accept. No man would engage in the pursuit 
of philosophy if he thought that all philosophy is merely an ex- 
pression of irrational bias. But every philosopher will agree that 
many other philosophers have been actuated by bias, and have 
had extra-rational reasons, of which they were usually unconscious, 
for many of their opinions. Marx, like the rest, believes in the 
truth of his own doctrines; he does not regard them as nothing 
but an expression of the feelings natural to a rebellious middle- 
class German Jew in the middle of the nineteenth century. What 
cart be said about this conflict between the subjective and objective 
views of a philosophy ? 

We may say, in a broad way, that Greek philosophy down to 
Aristotle expresses the mentality appropriate to the City State; 
that Stoicism is appropriate to a cosmopolitan despotism; that 
scholastic philosophy is an intellectual expression of the Church 
as an organization; that philosophy since Descartes, or at any 
rate since Locke, tends to embody the prejudices of the commercial 
middle class; and that Marxism and Fascism are philosophies 
appropriate to the modern industrial State. This, I think, is, both 
true and important. I think, however, that Marx is wrong in 
two respects. First, the social circumstances of which account 
must be taken are quite as much political as economic; they have 
to do with power, of which wealth is only one form. Second, 
social causation largely ceases to* apply as soon as a problem 
becomes detailed and technical. The first of these objections I 
have set forth to my book Power, and I shall therefore say no, 

813 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

more about it. The second more intimately concerns the history 
of philosophy, and I will give some examples of its scope. 

Take, first, the problem of universals. This problem was first 
discussed by Plato, then by Aristotle, by the Schoolmen, by the 
British empiricists, and by the most modern logicums v It would 
be absurd to deny that bias has influenced the opinions of philo- 
sophers on this question. Plato was influenced by Parmenides 
and Orphism; he wanted an eternal world, and could not believe 
in the ultimate reality of the temporal flux. Aristotle was more 
empirical, and had no dislike of the every-day world. Thorough- 
going empiricists in modern times have a bias which is the 
opposite of Plato's : they find the thought of a super-sensible world 
unpleasant, and are willing to go to great lengths to avoid having 
to believe in it. But these opposing kinds of bias are perennial, 
and have only a somewhat remote connection with the social 
system. It is said that love of the eternal is characteristic of a 
leisure class, which lives on the labour of others. I doubt if this 
is true. Epictetus and Spinoza were not gentlemen of leisure. It 
might be urged, on the contrary, that the conception of heaven 
as a place where nothing is done is that of weary toilers who 
want nothing but rest. Such argumentation can be carried on 
indefinitely, and leads nowhere. 

On the other hand, when we come to the detail of the con- 
troversy about universals, we find that each side can invent argu- 
ments which the other side will admit to be valid. Some of 
Aristotle's criticisms of Plato on this question have been almost 
universally accepted. In quite recent times, although no decision 
has been reached, a new technique has been developed, and many 
incidental problems have been solved. It is not irrational to hope 
that, before very long, a definite agreement may be reached by 
logicians on this question. 

Take, as a second example, the ontological argument. This, as 
we tave een, was invented by Anseim, rejected by Thomas 
Aquinas, accepted by Descartes, refuted by Kant, and reinstated 
by Hegel. I think it may be said quite decisively that, as a result 
of analysts of the concept "existence," modern logic has proved 
this argument invalid. This is not a matter of temperament or of 
the social system; it is a purely technical matter. The refutation 
of the argument affords, of course, no ground for supposing its 
^conclusion, namely the existence of God, to be untrue; if it did, 

814 



KARL MARX 

we cannot suppose that Thomas Aquinas would have rejected 
the argument. 

Or take the question of materialism. This is a word which is 
capable of many meanings; we have seen that Marx radically 
altered its significance. The heated controversies as to its truth 
or falsehood have largely depended, for their continued vitality, 
upon avoidance of definition. When the term is defined, it will 
be found that, according to some possible definitions, materialism 
is demonstrably false; according to certain others, it may be true, 
though there is no positive reason to think so; while according to 
yet other definitions there are some reasons in its favour, though 
these reasons are not conclusive. All this, again, depends upon 
technical considerations, and has nothing to do with the social 
system. 

The truth of the matter is really fairly simple. What is conven- 
tionally called "philosophy" consists of two very different ele- 
ments. On the one hand, there are questions which are scientific 
or logical; these are amenable to methods as to which there is 
general agreement. On the other hand, there are questions of 
passionate interest to large numbers of people, as to which there 
is no solid evidence either way. Among the latter are practical 
questions as to which it is impossible to remain aloof. When there 
is a war, I must support my own country or come into painful 
conflict both with friends and with the authorities. At many times 
there has been no middle course between supporting and opposing 
the official religion. For one reason or another, we all find it 
impossible to iftaintain an attitude of sceptical detachment on 
many issues as to which pure reason is silent. A "p&losophy," 
in a very usual sense of the word, is an organic whole of such extra- 
rational decisions. It is in regard to "philosophy" in this sense 
that Marx's contention is largely true. But even in this sense a 
philosophy is determined by other social causes as well as by 
those that are economic. War, especially, has its share jp historical 
causation ; and victory in war docs not always go to the side with 
the greatest economic resources. 

Marx fitted his philosophy of history into a mould suggested 
by Hegelian dialectic, but in fact there was only one triad that 
concerned him: feudalism, represented by the landowner; 
capitalism, represented by the industrial employer; and Socialism, 
represented by the wage-earner. Hegel thought of nations as the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

vehicles of dialectic movement ; Marx substituted classes. He dis- 
claimed always all ethical or humanitarian reasons for preferring 
Socialism or taking the side of the wage-earner; he maintained, 
not that this side was ethically better, but that it was the side 
taken by the dialectic in its wholly deterministic movement. He 
might have said that he did not advocate Socialism, but only 
prophesied it. This, however, would not have been wholly true. 
He undoubtedly believed every dialectical movement to be, in 
some impersonal sense, a progress, and he certainly held that 
Socialism, once established, would minister to human happiness 
more than either feudalism or capitalism have dope. These beliefs, 
though they must have controlled his life, remained largely in the 
background so far as his writings are concerned. Occasionally, 
however, he abandons calm prophecy for vigorous exhortation to 
rebellion, and the emotional basis of his ostensibly scientific 
prognostications is implicit in all he wrote. 

Considered purely as a philosopher, Marx has grave short- 
comings. He is too practical, too much wrapped up in the problems 
of his time. His purview is confined to this planet, and, within 
this planet, to Man. Since Copernicus, it has been evident that 
Man has not the cosmic importance which he formerly arrogated 
to himself. No man who has failed to assimilate this fact has a 
right to call his philosophy scientific. 

There goes with this limitation to terrestrial affairs a readineVs 
to believe in progress as a universal law. This readiness charac- 
terized the nineteenth century, and existed in Marx as much as 
in bis contemporaries. It is only because of the belief in the 
inevitability of progress that Marx thought it possible to dispense 
with ethical considerations. If Socialism was coming, it must be 
an improvement. He would have readily admitted that it would 
not seem to be an improvement to landowners or capitalists, but 
that only showed that they were out of harmony with the dialectic 
movement of the time. Marx professed himself an atheist, but 
retained a cosmic optimism which only theism could justify. 

Broadly speaking, all the elements in Marx's philosophy which 
are derived from Hegel are unscientific, in the sense that there is 
no reason whatever to suppose them true. 
* Perhaps the philosophic draft that Marx gave to his Socialism 
had really not much to do with the basis of his opinions. It is 
easy to restate the most important part of what he had to say 

816 



KARL MARX 

without any reference to the dialectic. He was impressed by the 
appalling cruelty of the industrial system as it existed in England 
a hundred years ago, which he came to know thoroughly through 
Engels and the reports of Royal Commissions. He saw that the 
system v&s .likely to develop from free competition towards 
monopoly, and that its injustice must produce a movement of 
revolt in the proletariat. He held that, in a thoroughly indus- 
trialized community, the only alternative to private capitalism is 
State ownership of land and capital. None of these propositions 
are matters for pliilosophy, and I shall therefore not consider 
their truth or falsehood. The point is that, if true, they suffice to 
establish what is practically important in his system. The Hegelian 
trappings might therefore be dropped with advantage. 

The history of Marx's reputation has been peculiar. In his own 
country his doctrines inspired the programme of the Social Demo- 
cratic Party, which grew steadily until, in the general election of 
1912, it secured one third of all the votes cast. Immediately after 
the first world war, the Social Democratic Party was for a time 
in power, and Ebert, the first president of the Weimar Republic, 
was a member of it; but by this time the Party had ceased to 
adhere to Marxist orthodoxy. Meanwhile, in Russia, fanatical 
believers in Marx had acquired the government. In the West, 
no large working-class movement has been quite Marxist; the 
Ijfitish labour Party, at times, has seemed to move in that direc- 
tion, but has nevertheless adhered to an empirical type of 
Socialism. Large numbers of intellectuals, however, have been 
profoundly influenced by him, both in England and in America. 
In Germany all advocacy of his doctrines has bedh forcibly 
suppressed, but may be expected to revive when the Nazis are 
overthrown. 1 

Modern Europe and America have thus been divided, politically 
and ideologically, into three camps. There are Liberals, who still, 
as far as may be, follow Locke or Bentham, but with \arying 
degrees of adaptation to the needs of industrial organization. There 
are Marxists, who control the Government in Russia, and are 
likely to become increasingly influential in various other countries. 
These two sections of opinion are philosophically not very widely 
separated, both are rationalistic, and both, in intention, drc 
scientific and empirical. But from the point of view of practical 
1 I am writing in 1943. 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

politics the division is sharp. It appears already in the letter of 
James Mill quoted in the preceding chapter, saying "their notions 
of property look ugly." 

It must, however, be admitted that there are certain respects in 
which the rationalism of Marx is subject to limitations.. Although 
he holds that his interpretation of the trend of development is 
true, and will be borne out by events, he believes that the argu- 
ment will only appeal (apart from rare exceptions) to those whose 
class interest is in agreement with it. He hopes little from per- 
suasion, everything from the class war. He is thus committed in 
practice to power politics, and to the doctrine of a master class, 
though not of a master race. It is true that, as a result of the social 
revolution, the division of classes is expected ultimately to dis- 
appear, giving place to complete political and economic harmony. 
But this is a distant ideal, like the Second Coming; in the mean- 
time, there is war and dictatorship, and insistence upon ideological 
orthodoxy. 

The third section of modern opinion, represented politically by 
Nazis and Fascists, differs philosophically from the other two far 
more profoundly than they differ from each other. It is anti- 
rational and anti-scientific. Its philosophical progenitors are 
Rousseau, Fichte, and Nietzsche. It emphasizes will, especially 
will to power; this it believes to be mainly concentrated in certain 
races and individuals, who therefore have a right to rule. 

Until Rousseau, the philosophical world had a certain unity. 
This has disappeared for the time being, but perhaps not for long. 
It can be recovered by a rationalistic recon quest of men's minds, 
but not in any other way, since claims to mastery can only 
breed strife. 



Chapter XXVIII 
BERGSON 



HENRI BERGSON was the leading French philosopher of 
the present century. He influenced William James and 
Whitehead, and had a considerable effect upon French 
thought. Sorel, who was a vehement advocate of syndicalism and 
the author of a book called Reflections on Violence, used Bergsonian 
irrationalism to justify a revolutionary labour movement having 
no definite goal. In the end, however, Sorel abandoned syndicalism 
and became a royalist. The main effect of Bergson's philosophy 
was conservative, and it harmonized easily with the movement 
which culminated in Vichy. But Bergson's irrationalism made a 
wide appeal quite unconnected with politics, for instance to 
Bernard Shaw, whose Back to Methuselah is pure Bergsonism. 
Forgetting politics, it is in its purely philosophical aspect that we 
must consider it. I have dealt with it somewhat fully as it exempli- 
ties admirably the revolt against reason which, beginning with 
Rousseau, has gradually dominated larger and larger areas in the 
lifb and thought of the world. 1 

The classification of philosophies is effected, as a rule, either 
by their methods or by their results: "empirical" and "a priori" 
is a classification by methods, "realist" and "idealist" is a classi- 
fication by results. An attempt to classify Bergson's philosophy 
in either of these ways is hardly likely to be successful, since it 
cuts across all the recognized divisions. 

But there is another way of classifying philosophies, less precise, 
but perhaps more helpful to the non-philosophical; in this way, 
the principle of division is according to the predominant desire 
which has led the philosopher to philosophize. Thus Wfc shall have 
philosophies of feeling, inspired by the love of happiness; theoret- 
ical philosophies, inspired by the love of knowledge; and practical 
philosophies, inspired by the love of action. 

Among philosophies of feeling we shall place all those which 

1 The remainder of this chapter i* in the main a reprint of an article 
published in Tk* Montr* for 1911. 

8l 9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

we primarily optimistic or pessimistic, all those that offer schemes 
of salvation or try to prove that salvation is impossible; to this 
class belong most religious philosophies. Among theoretical philo- 
sophies we shall place most of the great systems; for though the 
desire for knowledge is rare, it has been the sourcp of* most of 
what is best in philosophy. Practical philosophies, on the other 
hand, will be those which regard action as the supreme good, 
considering happiness an effect and knowledge a mere instrument 
of successful activity. Philosophies of this type would have been 
common among Western Europeans if philosophers had been 
average men; as it is, they have been rare until recent times; in 
fact their chief representatives are the pragma tists and Bergson. 
In the rise of this type of philosophy we may see, as Bergson 
himself does, the revolt of the modern man of action against the 
authority of Greece, and more particularly of Plato; or we may 
connect it, as Dr. Schiller apparently would, with imperialism 
and the motor-car. The modern world calls for such a philosophy, 
and the success which it has achieved is therefore not surprising. 

Bergson 's philosophy, unlike most of the systems of the past, is 
dualistic: the world, for him, is divided into two disparate portions, 
on the one hand life, on the other matter, or rather that inert 
something which the intellect views as matter. The whole universe 
is the clash and conflict of two opposite motions : life, which climbs 
upward, and matter, which falls downward. Life is one great forte, 
one vast vital impulse, given once for all from the beginning of the 
world, meeting the resistance of matter, struggling to break a way 
through matter, learning gradually to use matter by means of 
organization; divided by the obstacles it encounters into diverging 
currents, like the wind at a street-corner; partly subdued by 
matter through the very adaptations which matter forces upon it ; 
yet retaining always its capacity for free activity, struggling always 
to find new outlets, seeking always for greater liberty of movement 
amid the opposing walk of matter. 

Evolution is not primarily explicable by adaptation to environ* 
meat; adaptation explains only the turns and twists of evolution, 
like the windings of a road approaching a town through hilly 
country. But this simile is not quite adequate; there is no town, 
06 definite goal, at the end 06 the road along which evolution 
travels. Mechanism and teleology suffer from the same defect: 
suppose that there is no essential novelty in the world. 

824 



BERGSON 

Mechanism regards the future as implicit in the past, and tele- 
ology, since it believes that the end to be achieved can be known in 
advance, denies that any essential novelty is contained in the result. 

As against both these views, though with more sympathy for 
teleology* than fpr mechanism, Bergson maintains that evolution 
is truly creative, like the work of an artist. An impulse to action, 
an undefined want, exists beforehand, but until the want is satis- 
fied it is impossible to know the nature of what will satisfy it. For 
example, we may suppose some vague desire in sightless animals 
to be able to be aware of objects before they were in contact with 
them. This led to efforts which finally resulted in the creation of 
eyes. Sight satisfied the desire, but could not have been imagined 
beforehand. For this reason, evolution is unpredictable, and deter- 
minism cannot refute the advocates of free will. 

This broad outline is filled in by an account of the actual devel- 
opment of life on the earth. The first division of the current was 
into plants and animals; plants aimed at storing up energy in a 
reservoir, animals aimed at using energy for sudden and rapid 
movements. But among animals, at a later stage, a new bifurcation 
appeared: instinct and intellect became more or less separated. 
They arc never wholly without each other, but in the main intellect 
is the misfortune of man, while instinct is seen at its best in ants, 
bees, and Bergson. The division between intellect and instinct is 
fundamental in his philosophy, much of which is a kind of Sand- 
ford and Meiton, with instinct as the good boy and intellect as the 
bad boy. 

Instinct at its best is called intuition. u By intuition" he says, "I 
mean instinct that lias become disinterested, self-oonscious, 
capable of reflecting upon its object and of enlarging it inde- 
finitely.' 1 The account of the doings of intellect is not always easy 
to follow, but if \ve are to understand Bergson we must do our best. 

Intelligence or intellect, "as it leaves the hands of nature, has 
for its chief object the inorganic solid"; it can only form a clear 
idea of the discontinuous and immobile; its concepts are oiltside 
each other like objects in space, and have the same stability. The 
intellect separates in space and fixes in time; it is not made to 
think evolution, but to represent becoming as a series of states. "The 
intellect is characterized by a natuqil inability to understand life"< 
geometry and logic, which are its typical products, are strictly 
applicable to solid bodies, but elsewhere reasoning must be checked 

821 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

by common sense, which, as Bergson truly says, is a very different 
thing. Solid bodies, it would seem, are something which mind has 
created on purpose to apply intellect to them, much as it has 
created chess-boards in order to play chess on them. The genesis 
of intellect and the genesis of material bodies, ,we are told, are 
correlative; both have been developed by reciprocal adaptation. 
"An identical process must have cut out matter and the intellect, 
at the same time, from a stuff that contained both/* 

This conception of the simultaneous growth of matter and in- 
tellect is ingenious, and deserves to be understood. Broadly, I 
think, what is meant is this: Intellect is the power of seeing things 
as separate one from another, and matter is that which is separated 
into distinct things. In reality there are no separate solid things, 
only an endless stream of becoming, in which nothing becomes 
and there is nothing that this nothing becomes. But becoming may 
be a movement up or a movement down : when it is a movement 
up it is called life, when it is a movement down it is what, as 
misapprehended by the intellect, is called matter. I suppose the 
universe is shaped like a cone, with the Absolute at the vertex, for 
the movement up brings things together, while the movement 
down separates them, or at least seems to do so. In order that the 
upward motion of mind may be able to thread its way through 
the downward motion of the falling bodies which hail upon it, it 
must be able to cut out paths between them; thus as intelligence 
was formed, outlines and paths appeared, and the primitive flux 
was cut up into separate bodies. The intellect may be compared 
to a carver, but it has the peculiarity of imagining that the chicken 
always was the separate pieces into which the carving-knife 
divides it. 

"The intellect," Bergson says, "always behaves as if it were 
fascinated by the contemplation of inert matter. It is life looking 
outward, putting itself outside itself, adopting the ways of unor- 
ganized nature in principle, in order to direct them in fact." If 
we nay te allowed to add another image to the many by which 
Bergson 's philosophy is illustrated, we may say that the universe is 
a vast funicular railway, in which Ufe is the train that goes up, and 
matter is the train that goes down. The intellect consists in watch- 
ing the descending train as it ppsses the ascending train in which 
we are. The obviously nobler faculty which concentrates its atten- 
tion on our own train is instinct or intuition. It is possible to leap 

822 



DPRGSON 

from one train to the other; this happens when we become the 
victims of automatic habit, and is the essence of the comic. Or 
we can divide ourselves into parts, one part going up and one 
down ; then only the part going down is comic. But intellect is not 
itself a <J e8( n ding motion, it is merely an observation of the 
descending motion by the ascending motion. 

Intellect, which separates things, is, according to Bergson, a 
kind of dream; it is not active, as all our life ought to be, but 
purely contemplative. When we dream, he says, our self is scat- 
tered, our past is broken into fragments, things which really inter- 
penetrate each other are seen as separate solid units: the extra- 
spatial degrades itself into spatiality, which is nothing but separate- 
ness. Thus all intellect, since it separates, tends to geometry; and 
logic, which deals with concepts that lie wholly outside each other, 
is really an outcome of geometry, following the direction of 
materiality. Both deduction and induction require spatial intuition 
behind them; "the movement at the end of which is spatiality 
lays down along its course the faculty of induction, as well as that 
of deduction, in fact, intellectuality entire." It creates them in 
mind, and also the order in things which the intellect finds there. 
Thus logic and mathematics do not represent a positive spiritual 
effort, but a mere somnambulism, in which the will is suspended, 
and the mind is no longer active. Incapacity for mathematics is 
therefore a sign of grace fortunately a very common one. 

As intellect is connected with space, so instinct or intuition is 
connected with time. It is one of the noteworthy features of Berg- 
son's philosophy that, unlike most writers, he regards time and 
space as profoundly dissimilar. Space, the characteristic! of matter, 
arises from a dissection of the flux which is really illusory, useful, 
up to a certain point, in practice, but utterly misleading in theory. 
Time, on the contrary, is the essential characteristic of life or 
mind. "Wherever anything lives," he says, "there is, open some- 
where, a register in which time is being inscribed." But tfye time 
here spoken of is not mathematical time, the homogeneous assem- 
blage of mutually external instants. Mathematical time, according 
to Bergson, is really a form of space; the time which is of the 
essence of life is what he calls duration. This conception of duration 
is fundamental in his philosophy t it appears already in his earliest 
book Tune and Free Will, and it is necessary to understand it if 
we art to have any comprehension of his system. It is, however 

3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

a very difficult conception. I do not fully understand it myself, and 
therefore I cannot hope to explain it with all the lucidity which it 
doubtless deserves. 

"Pure duration/' we are told, "is the form which our conscious 
states assume when our ego lets itself live, when it refrains from 
separating its present state from its former states." It forms the 
past and the present into one organic whole, where there is mutual 
penetration, succession without distinction. "Within our ego, there 
is succession without mutual externality; outside the ego, in pure 
space, there is mutual externality without succession." 

"Questions relating to subject and object, to their distinction 
and their union, should be put in terms of time rather than of 
space.*' In the duration in which we see ourselves acting, there art 
dissociated elements; but in the duration in which we act, our 
states melt into each other. Pure duration is what is most removed 
from externality and least penetrated with externality, a duration 
in which the past is big with a present absolutely new. But then 
our will is strained to the utmost ; \ve have to gather up the past 
which is slipping away, and thrust it whole and undivided into 
the present. At such moments we truly possess ourselves, but such 
moments are rare. Duration is the very stuff of reality, which is 
perpetual becoming, never something made. 

It is above all in memory that duration exhibits itself, for in 
memory the past survives in the present. Thus the theory *of 
memory becomes of great importance in Bergson's philosophy. 
Matter and Memory is concerned to show the relation of mind and 
matter, of which both are affirmed to be real, by an analysis of 
memory, frhich is "ju&t the intersection of mind and matter." 

There are, he *ay$, two radically different things, both of which 
are commonly called memory ; the distinction between the*c two 
i* much emphasized by ikrgson* "The part survive*," he *ay*. 
"under two distinct forms: first, in motor mechanUm* *, secondly, 
in independent recollection*." For example, a man i* said to 
remember* poem if he can repeat it by houn, that t* to say, if he 
has acquired a certain habit or mechanism enabling him to repeat 
a former action. But he might, at icart theoretically, be able to 
repeat the poem without any recollection of the previous occasion* 
oh which he ha* read it; thus^here t* no con*cioutne** of part 
events involved in thi* sort of memory. The *ecood ton, which 
Alone really deserve* to be called memory, t* exhibited in rtcol- 



BERGSON 

lections of separate occasions when he has read the poem, each 
unique and with a date. Here, he thinks, there can be no question 
of habit, since each event only occurred once, and had to make its 
impression immediately. It is suggested that in some way every- 
thing that has happened to us is remembered, but as a rule only 
what is useful comes into consciousness. Apparent failures of 
memory, it is argued, are not really failures of the mental part of 
memory, but of the motor mechanism for bringing memory into 
action. This view is supported by a discussion of brain physiology 
and the facts of amnesia, from which it is held to result that true 
memory is not a function of the brain. The past must be acted by 
matter, imagined by mind. Memory is not an emanation of matter; 
indeed the contrary would be nearer the truth if we mean matter 
as grasped in concrete perception, which always occupies a certain 
duration. 

44 Memory must be, in principle, a power absolutely independent 
of matter. If, then, spirit is a reality, it is here, in the phenomena 
of memory, that we may come into touch with it experimentally." 

At the opposite end from pure memory Bergson places pure 
perception, in regard to which he adopts an ultra-realist position. 
"In pure perception," he says, "we are actually placed outside 
ourselves, we touch the reality of the object in an immediate 
intuition." So completely does he identify perception with its 
object that he almost refuses to call it mental at all. "Pure percep- 
tion," he says, "which is the lowest degree of mind mind with- 
out memory is really pan of matter, as we understand matter/' 
Pure perception is constituted by dawning action, its actuality lies 
in its activity. It is in this way that the brain becomes relevant to 
perception, for the brain is not an instrument of action. The 
function of the brain is to limit our mental life to what is practically 
useful. But for the brain, one gathers, everything would be per- 
ceived, but in fact we only perceive what interests us. "The body, 
always turned towards action, has for its essential function to limit, 
with a view to action, the life of the spirit." It is, in fact, an 
instrument of choice. 

We must now return to the subject of instinct or intuition, as 
opposed to intellect. It was necessary first to give some account 
of duration and memory, since tfergson's theories of duration and 
memory are presupposed in his account of intuition. In man, as 
he how exists, intuition is the fringe or penumbra of intellect: 

825 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

it his been thrust out of the centre by being tow useful in action 
than intellect, but it has deeper uses which make it desirable to 
bring it back into greater prominence. Bergson wishes to make 
intellect "turn inwards on itself, snd awaken the potentialities of 
intuition which still slumber within it/' The relation between 
instinct and intellect is compared to that between sight and touch. 
Intellect, we are told, will not give knowledge of things at a dis- 
tance; indeed the function of science is said to be to explain sll 
perceptions in terms of touch. 

"Instinct alone/' he says, "is knowledge at a distance* It has the 
same relation to intelligence that vision has to touch/' We may 
observe in passing that, as appears in many passages, Bcrgson u 
a strong visualizer, whose thought is always conducted by means 
of visual images. 

The essential characteristic of intuition is that it Joes not divide 
the world into separate things, a* the intellect docs; although 
Bergson does not use these words, *e might datcnbt it su syn- 
thetic rather than analytic. It apprehends a multiplicity, but a 
multiplicity of interpenetrating processes, not of *patul!v c*tcrtul 
bodies. There are in truth no thingi " things ami utr arc only 
views, taken by our mind, of becoming. Thrrc arc no thtn#*, there 
are only actions/' This view of the world, which appear* difficult 
and unnatural to intellect, is easy and natural to intuition. Mcmojy 
affords an instance of what is meant, for in memory the pan live* 
on into the present and interpenetrates it. Apart from mmd, the 
world would be perpetually dying and being bom ajrain ; the past 
would have no reality, and therefore thcrrc would be no past. It i 
memory, with its correlative desire, that makes the past and the 
'future real and therefore creates true duration and true time. 
Intuition alone can understand this mingling of past and future: 
to the intellect they remain external, spatially external as it were, 
to one another. Under the guidance of intuition, we perceive that 
"form is only a snapshot view of a transition/' and the philosopher 
"will see the material world mete back into a single flux/' 

Closely connected with the merits of intuition are Bcrgaon's 
doctrine of freedom and his praise of action. "In reality/' he says, 
"a living being is a centre of action. It represents a certain sum 
of contingency entering into the* world, that is to say, a certain 
quantity of possible action/' The arguments against free will 
depend partly upon assuming that the intensity of psychical states 



BERG80N 

is a quantity, capable, at least in theory, of numerical measure- 
ment; this view Bergson undertakes to refute in the first chapter 
of Time and Free Will. Partly the determinist depends, we are 
told, upon a confusion between true duration and mathematical 
time, whteh 'Bergson regards as really a form of space. Partly, 
again, the determinist rests his case upon the unwarranted assump- 
tion that, when the state of the brain is given, the state of the 
mind is theoretically determined. Bergson is willing to admit that 
the converse is true, that is to say, that the state of brain is deter- 
minate when the state of mind is given, but he regards the mind 
as more differentiated than the brain, and therefore holds that 
many different states of mind may correspond to one state of 
brain. He concludes that real freedom is possible: "We are free 
when our acts spring from our whole personality, when they express 
it, when they have that indefinable resemblance to it which one 
sometimes finds between the artist and his work." 

In the above outline, I have in the main endeavoured merely 
to state Bergson 's views, without giving the reasons adduced by 
him in favour of their truth. This is easier than it would be with 
most philosophers, since as a rule he does not give reasons for his 
opinions, but relies on their inherent attractiveness, and on the 
charm of an excellent style. Like advertisers, he relies upon 
picturesque and varied statement, and on apparent explanation 
of many obscure facts. Analogies and similes, especially, form a 
very large part of the whole process by which he recommends 
his views to the reader. The number of similes for life to be 
found in his works exceeds the number in any poet kngwn to me. 
Life, he says, is like a shell bursting into fragments which are 
again shells. It is like a sheaf. Initially, it was "a tendency to 
accumulate in a reservoir, as do especially the green parts of 
vegetables. 11 But the reservoir is to be filled with boiling water 
from which steam is issuing; "jets must be gushing out un- 
ceasingly, of which each, falling back, is a world. "*\gaift "life 
appears in its entirety as an immense wave which, starting from 
a centre, spreads outwards, and which on almost the whole of its 
circumference is stopped and converted into oscillation: at one 
single point the obstacle has bcen t forced, the impulsion has passed 
freely." Then there is the great climax in which life is compared 
to a cavalry charge. "All organized beings, from the humblest to 
the highest, from the first origins of life to the time in which wt 



WESTERN PHILOSOFHICAt THOUdHt 

are, and in ill places ss in til times, do but evidence a single 
impulsion, the inverse of the movement of milter, and in itself 
indivisible. All the living hold together, and all yield to the same 
tremendous push. The animal takes its stand on the plant, man 
bestrides animality, and the whole of humanity, intpfce and in 
time, is one immense army galloping beside and before and behind 
each of us in an overwhelming charge able to beat down every 
resistance and to clear many obstacles, perhaps even death/* 

But a cool critic, who feels himself a mere spectator, perhaps 
an unsympathetic spectator, of the charge in which man is mounted 
upon animality, may be inclined to think that calm and cartful 
thought is hardly compatible with this form of eaercise. When he 
is told that thought i* a mere means of action, the mere impuUc 
to avoid obstacles in the field, he may feel that such a view w 
becoming in a cavalry officer, hut not in a philosopher, whose 
business, after all, is with thought : he may fcrl that in the paatton 
and noise of violent motion there is no nxm for the fainter rou*c 
of reason, no leisure for the diaintcrrstrd contemplation in which 
greatness is sought, not by turbulence, but by the grratne* of 
the universe which is mirrored. In that oue, he nuy he tempted 
to ask whether there are any reason* fur accepting uch a re* tic** 
view of the world. And if he a&k* this question, he uill find, if 
I am not mistaken, that there ui no reason uhatctcr for accrptifg 
this view, either in the universe <*r in the urttm&r* of M Bergton. 



The two foundations of Bergsun's philosophy, in K> far an it i* 
more than an imaginative and j>octic \iew of the utrld, arc hi* 
doctrines of space and linur. Hi* doctrine of space it required for 
his condemnation of the intellect, and if he fail* in hit condemna- 
tion of the intellect, the intellect will succeed in it* condemna- 
tion of him for between the two it is war to the knife. !ii doctrine 
of time is necessary for his vindication of freedom, for his escape 
from what William Jam called a "block universe," for htf doctrine 
of a perpetual flux in which there is nothing that flows, and for his 
whole account of tiie relations between mind and matter. It mil be 
well, therefore, in criticism, to concentrate on these two doctrines, 
if they are true, such minor errors and inconsistencies as no philo- 
dbpher escapes would not greatly matter; while if they are false, 

82* 



BBR080N 

nothing remains except an imaginative epic, to be judgfed on 
aesthetic rather than on intellectual grounds. I shall begin with 
the theory of space, as being the simpler of the two. 

Bergaon's theory of space occurs fully and explicitly in his Time 
and Free Will, and therefore belongs to the oldest parts of his 
philosophy. In his first chapter, he contends that greater and let* 
imply space, since he regards the greater as essentially that which 
contains the less. He offers no arguments whatever, either good 
or bad, in favour of this view; he merely exclaims, as though he 
were giving an obvious reductio ad absurdum: "As if one could 
still speak of magnitude where there is neither multiplicity nor 
space!" The obvious cases to the contrary, such as pleasure and 
pain, afford him much difficulty, yet he never doubts or re- 
examines the dogma with which he starts. 

In his next chapter, he maintains the same thesis as regards 
number. "As soon as we wish to picture number to ourselves," 
he says, "and not merely figures or words, we are compelled to 
have recourse to an extended image," and "every clear idea of 
number implies a visual image in space." These two sentences 
suffice to show, as I shall try to prove, that Bergson does not know 
what number is, and has himself no clear idea of it. This is shown 
also by his definition: "Number may be defined in general as a 
collection of units, or speaking more exactly, as the synthesis of 
the one and the many." 

In discussing these statements, I must ask the reader's patience 
for a moment while I call attention to some distinctions which may 
at first appear pedantic, but are really vital. There are three entirely 
different things which are confused by Bergson in the above state- 
ments, namely: (i) number, the general concept applicable to the 
various particular numbers; (2) the various particular numbers; 
(3) the various collections to which the various particular numbers 
are applicable. It is this Lst that is defined by Bergson when he 
says that number is a collection of units. The twelve ajjpstle, the 
twelve tribes of Israel, the twelve months, the twelve signs of the 
zodiac, are all collections of units, yet no one of them is the 
number 12, still less is it number in general, as by the above 
definition it ought to be. The number 12, obviously, is something 
which all these collections have ifl common, but which they do 
not have in common with other collections, such as cricket elevens. 
Hence the number 12 is neither a collection of twelve terms, nor ' 

8*9 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

fallacies and confusions, to support them in their attempt to prove 
all mathematics self-contradictory. Thence the Hegelian account 
of these matters passed into the current thought of philosophers, 
where it has remained long after the mathematicians have removed 
all the difficulties upon which the philosophers rely. Apd so long 
as the main object of philosophers is to show that nothing can be 
learned by patience and detailed thinking, but that we ought rather 
to worship the prejudices of the ignorant under the title of "reason" 
if we are Hegelians, or of "intuition" if we are Bcrgsonians, so 
long philosophers will take care to remain ignorant of what mathe- 
maticians have done to remove the errors by which Hegel profited. 

Apart from the question of number, which we have already 
considered, the chief point at which Bergson touches mathematics 
is his rejection of what he calls the "cinematographic" represen- 
tation of the world. Mathematics conceives change, even con- 
tinuous change, as constituted by a scries of states; Bergson, on 
the contrary, contends that no series of states can represent what 
is continuous, and that in change a thing is never in any state at 
all. The new that change is constituted by a series of changing 
states he calls cinematographic; this view, he says, is natural to 
the intellect, but is radically vicious. True change can only be 
explained by true duration; it involves an interpenetration of past 
and present, not a mathematical succession of static states. This 
is what is called a "dynamic" instead of a "static'* view of the 
world. The question is important, and in spite of its difficulty we 
cannot pass it by. 

Bergson 's position is illustrated and what is to be said in 
criticism may also be aptly illustrated- by Zcno's argument of 
the arrow. Zeno argues that, since the arrow at each moment 
simply is where it is, therefore the arrow in its flight is always 
at rest. At first sight, this argument may not appear a very powerful 
one. Of course, it will be said, the arrow is where it is at one 
moment, but at another moment it is somewhere cl*e, and this is 
just what constitutes motion. Certain difficulties, it is true, arise 
out of the continuity of motion, if we insist upon assuming that 
motion is also discontinuous. These difficulties, thus obtained, 
have long been pan of the stock-in-trade of philosophers. But if, 
ririth the mathematicians, we fcvoid the assumption that motion 
is also discontinuous, we shall not fall into the philosopher's 
^difficulties. A cinematograph in which there are an infinite number 



BERGSON 

of pictures, and in which there is never a next picture because an 
infinite number come between any two, will perfectly represent 
a continuous motion. Wherein, then, lies the force of* Zeno's 
argument ? 

Zeno belonged to the Eleatic school, whose object was to prove 
that there'coilld be no such thing as change. The natural view to 
take of the world is that there are things which change; for example, 
there is an arrow which is now here, now there. By bisection of 
this view, philosophers have developed two paradoxes. The Eleatics 
said that there were things but no changes; Heraclitus and Bergson 
said there were changes but no things. The Eleatics said there was 
an arrow, but no flight; Heraclitus and Bergson said there was a 
flight, but no arrow. Each party conducted its argument by refu- 
tation of the other party. How ridiculous to say there is no arrow! 
say the "static" party. How ridiculous to say there is no flight! 
say the "dynamic" party. The unfortunate man who stands in the 
middle and maintains that there is both the arrow and its flight 
is assumed by the disputants to deny both; he is therefore pierced, 
like St. Sebastian, by the arrow from one side and by its flight 
from the other. But we have still not discovered wherein lies the 
force of Zeno's argument. 

Zeno assumes, tacitly, the essence of the Bergsonian theory of 
change. That is to say, he assumes that when a thing is in a process 
of .continuous change, even if it is only change of position, there 
must be in the thing some internal state of change. The thing 
must, at each instant, be intrinsically different from what it would 
be if it were not changing. He then points out that at each instant 
the arrow simply is where it is, just as it would be if it wore at rest. 
Hence he concludes that there can be no such thing as a state of 
motion, and therefore, adhering to the view that a state of motion 
is essential to motion, he infers that there can be no motion and 
that the arrow is always at rest. 

Zeno's argument, therefore, though it does not touch the mathe- 
matical account of change, does, prima facie, refutea vifew of 
change which is not unlike Bergson 's. How, then, does Bergson 
meet Zcno's argument ? He meets it by denying that the arrow is 
ever anywhere. After stating Zeno's argument, he replies: "Yes, 
if we suppose that the arrow can ever be in a point of its course. 
Yes, again, if the arrow, which is moving, ever coincides with 
a position, which is motionless. But the arrow never is in any 

2D 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

point of its course." This reply to Zeno, or a closely similar one 
concerning Achilles and the Tortoise, occurs in all his three books. 
Bergson's view, plainly, is paradoxical ; whether it is possible, is 
a question which demands a discussion of his view of duration. 
His only argument in its favour is the statement that the mathe- 
matical view of change "implies the absurd proposition that move- 
ment is made of immobilizes." But the apparent absurdity of this 
view is merely due to the verbal form in which he has stated it, 
and vanishes as soon as we realize that motion implies relations. 
A friendship, for example, is made out of people who are friends, 
but not out of friendships; a genealogy is made out of men, but 
not out of genealogies. So a motion is made out of what is moving, 
but not out of motions. It expresses the fact that a thing may be 
in different places at different times, and that the places may still 
be different however near together the times may be. Bergson's 
argument against the mathematical view of motion, therefore, 
reduces itself, in the last analysis, to a mere play upon words. 
And with this conclusion we may pass on to a criticism of his theory 
of duration. 

Bergson's theory of duration is bound up with his theory of 
memory. According to this theory, things remembered survive in 
memory, and thus interpenetrate present things : past and present 
are not mutually external, but are mingled in the unity of con- 
sciousness. Action, he says, is what constitutes being; but mathe- 
matical time is a mere passive receptacle, which does nothing and 
therefore is nothing. The past, he says, is that which acts no longer, 
and the present is that which is acting. But in this statement, as 
indeed throughout his account of duration, Bergson is uncon- 
sciously assuming the ordinary mathematical time; without this, 
his statements are unmeaning. What is meant by saying "the past 
is essentially that which acts no longer" (his italics), except that the 
past is that of which the action is past? the words "no longer" 
are words expressive of the past; to a person who did not have 
the ordiiury notion of the past as something outside the present, 
these words would have no meaning. Thus his definition is cir- 
cular. What he says is, in effect, "the past is that of which the 
action is in the past/' As a definition, this cannot be regarded as 
4 happy effort. And the same applies to the present. The present, 
we are told, is "that which it acting" (his italics). But the word 
"is" introduces just that idea of. the present which was to be 

' 



BERGSON 

defined. The present is that which is acting as opposed to that 
which was acting or will be acting. That is to say, the present is 
that whose action is in the present, not in the past or in the future. 
Again the definition is circular. An earlier passage on the same 
page will ^illustrate the fallacy further. "That which constitutes 
our pure perception," he says, "is our dawning action. . . . The 
actuality of our perception thus lies in its activity, in the move- 
ments which prolong it, and not in its greater intensity: the past is 
only idea, the present is ideo- motor/' This passage makes it quite 
clear that, when Bergson speaks of the past, he does not mean the 
past, but our present memory of the past. The past when it existed 
was just as active as the present is now; if Bergson 's account were 
correct, the present moment ought to be the only one in the whole 
history of the world containing any activity. In earlier times there 
were other perceptions, just as active, just as actual in their day, 
as our present perceptions; the past, in its day, was by no means 
only idea, but was in its intrinsic character just what the present 
is now. This real past, however, Bergson simply forgets; what he 
speaks of is the present idea of the past. The real past does not 
mingle with the present, since it is not part of it; but that is 
a very different thing. 

The whole of Bergson 's theory of duration and time rests 
throughout on the elementary confusion between the present 
occurrence of a recollection and the past occurrence which is 
recollected. But for the fact that time is so familiar to us, the 
vicious circle involved in his attempt to deduce the past as 
what is no longer active would be obvious at once. As it is, what 
Bergson gives is an account of the difference between perception 
and recollection both present facts and what he believes 
himself to have given is an account of the difference between the 
present and the past. As soon as this confusion is realized, his 
theory of time is seen to be simply a theory which omits time 
altogether. 

The confusion between present remembering and th past event 
remembered, which seems to be at the bottom of Bergson 's theory 
of time, is an instance of a more general confusion which, if I am 
not mistaken, vitiates a great deal of his thought, and indeed a 
great deal of the thought of moat modern philosophers I mean 
the confusion between an act of knowing and that which is known. 
In memory, the act of knowing is in the present, whereas what i\ 

135 



WESTERN ruiLoaomrcAt THOUGHT 

known is in the past; thus by coofuafaf them the ditdnction 
between past and present is blumd. 

Throughout A/aftifr rf AJ*wy, this confusion between the act 
of knowing and the object known it indispensable. It beitahrincd 
in the use of the word "image/* which is explained a; the vm 
beginning of the book. He their states that, apart from phiW 
phial theories, eir/ytAii^p rfari ire know consist* of ''foi^gw/ 1 
mi/bi indeed constitute the whole uwvcn*. He sayi; '7 cat! aw//^ 
regate of images, and 



ftfemd to the eventual action of one particular image, my body/' 
It will be observed that matter and the perception of matter, 
according to him, consist of the very same things. The brain, he 
aay* is like the rest of the material universe, and is therefore an 
image if the universe is an image. 

Since the brain, which nobody sees, is not, in the ordinary sciwr, 
an image, we are not surprised at his saying that an image can be 
without being perceived; but he explains later on that, as regard* 
images, the difference between Mag and being twwwuMly /Xrmt td 
is only one of degree. This is perhaps explained by another passage 
in which he says: "What can be a non-perceived material object, 
an image not imagined, unless it is a kind of unconscious mental 
state?" Finally he says: "Thar even' reality ha* a kinship, an 
analogy, in short a relation with consciousness this is what we 
concede to idealism by the very fact that we term things 'images? " 
Nevertheless he attempts to allay our initial doubt by saying that 
he is beginning at a point before any of the assumptions of philo- 
sophers have been introduced. "We will assume/ 9 he says, "for 
the moment that we know nothing of theories of matter and theories 
of spirit, nothing of the discussions as to the reality or ideality of 
the external world. Here I am in the presence of images." And in 
the new Introduction which he wrote for the English edition he 
says: "By 'image* we mean a certain existence which is more than 
that which the idealist calls a repretentatian, but less than that 
which" the 1 realist calls a thing an existence placed half-way 
between the 'thing* and the 'representation/ " 

The distinction which Bergson has in mind in the above is not, 

I think, the distinction between the imaging as a mental occurrence 

a*,d the thing imaged as an object. He is thinking of the distinction 

between the thing as it is and thing as it appears. The distinction 

Between subject and object, between the mind which thinks and 



BERO8ON 

remembers and has images on the one hand, and the objects 
thought about, remembered, or imaged this distinction, so. far 
as I can see, is wholly absent from his philosophy. Its absence is 
his real debt to idealism ; and a very unfortunate debt it is. In the 
case of '*im*ges," as we have just seen, it enables him first to speak 
of images as neutral between mind and matter, then to assert that 
the brain is an image in spite of the fact that it has never been 
imaged, then to suggest that matter and the perception of matter 
are the same thing, but that a non-perceived image (such as the 
brain) is an unconscious mental state; while finally, the use of the 
word "image," though involving no metaphysical theories what- 
ever, nevertheless implies that every reality has "a kinship, an 
analogy, in short a relation" with consciousness. 

All these confusions are due to the initial confusion of subjective 
and objective. The subject a thought or an image or a memory 
is a present fact in me; the object may be the law of gravitation 
or my friend Jones or the old Campanile of Venice. The subject 
is mental and is here and now. Therefore, if subject and object are 
one, the object is mental and is here and now: my friend Jones, 
though he believes himself to be in South America and to exist 
on his own account, is really in my head and exists in virtue of 
my thinking about him ; St. Mark's Campanile, in spite of its great 
s^e and the feet that it ceased to exist forty years ago, still exists, 
and is to be found complete inside me. These statements are no 
travesty of Bergson's theories of space and time ; they are merely 
an attempt to show what is the actual concrete meaning of those 
theories. 

The confusion of subject and object is not peculiar to Bergson* 
but is common to many idealists and many materialists. Many 
idealists say that the object is really the subject, and many mater- 
ialists say that the subject is really the object. They agree in 
thinking these two statements very different, while yet holding 
that subject and object are not different. In this respect, we may 
admit, Bergson has merit, for he is as ready to identify subject 
with object as to identify object with subject. As soon as this 
identification* is rejected, his whole system collapses: first his 
theories of space and time, then Jys belief in real contingency, then 
his condemnation of intellect, and finally his account of the rela- 
tions of mind and matter. ^ 

Of course a large pan of Bergson's philosophy, probably the 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

part to which most of its popularity is due, does not depend upon 
argument, and cannot be upset by argument. His imaginative 
picture of the world, regarded as a poetic effort, is in the main not 
capable of either proof or disproof. Shakespeare says life's but 
a walking shadow, Shelley says it is like a dome of many-coloured 
glass, Bergson says it is a shell which bursts into parts that are again 
shells. If you like Bergson 's image better, it is just as legitimate. 
The good which Bergson hopes to see realized in the world is 
action for the sake of action. All pure contemplation he calls 
"dreaming," and condemns by a whole series of uncomplimentary 
epithets: static, Platonic, mathematical, logical, intellectual. Those 
who desire some prevision of the end which action is to achieve 
are told that an end foreseen would be nothing new, because desire, 
like memory, is identified with its object. Thus we are condemned , 
in action, to be the blind slaves of instinct : the life-force pushes 
us on from behind, restlessly and unceasingly. There is no room 
hi this philosophy for the moment of contemplative insight when, 
rising above the animal life, we become conscious of the greater 
ends that redeem man from the life of the brute*. Thote to whom 
activity without purpose teem* a sufficient good will And in Berg- 
son's books a pleasing picture of the universe. But those to whom 
action, if it is to be of any value, must txr sntpircd by some vision, 
by some imaginative foreshadowing of a world low painful, Iqp 
unjust, less full of strife than the wurld of our everyday life, thuwr, 
in a word, whose action is built on < umrmpbiion, wit) find m thw 
philosophy nothing of what they icxri. and will not rqprcf that there 
is no reasoa to think it true 



Chapter XXIX 
WILLIAM JAMES 



WILLIAM JAMES (1842-1910) was primarily a psychologist, 
but was important in philosophy on two accounts: he 
invented the doctrine which he called "radical empiri- 
cism/ 9 and he was one of the three protagonists of the theory called 
"pragmatism" or "instrumentalism." In later life he was, as he 
deserved to be, the recognized leader of American philosophy. He 
was led by the study of medicine to the consideration of psycho- 
logy; his great book on the subject, published in 1890, had the 
highest possible excellence. I shall not, however, deal with it, since 
it was a contribution to science rather than to philosophy. 

There were two sides to William James's philosophical interests, 
one scientific, the other religious. On the scientific side, the study 
of medicine had given his thoughts a tendency towards material- 
ism, which, however, was held in check by his religious emotions. 
His religious feelings were very Protestant, very democratic, and 
very full of the warmth of human kindness. He refused altogether 
to follow his brother Henry into fastidious snobbishness. "The 
prince of darkness," he said, "may be a gentleman, as we are told 
he is, but whatever the God of earth and heaven is, he can surely 
be no gentleman." This is a very characteristic pronouncement. 

His warm-heartedness and his delightful humour caused him 
to be almost universally beloved. The only man I know of who did 
not feel any affection for him was Santayana, whose doctor's thesis 
William James had described as "the perfection of rottenness."* 
There was between these two men a temperamental opposition 
which nothing could have overcome. Santayana also liked religion, 
but in a very different way. He liked it aesthetically and historically, 
not as a help towards a moral life; as was natura^ hegreatly 
preferred Catholicism to Protestantism. He did not intellectually 
accept any of the Christian dogmas, but he was content that others 
should believe them, and himself appreciated what he regarded 
as the Christian myth. To James, such an attitude could not but 
appear immoral. He retained frtrni his Puritan ancestry a deep- 
seated belief that what is of most importance is good conduct, and 
his democratic feeling made him unable to acquiesce in the notion 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of one truth for philosophers and another for the vulgar. The 
temperamental opposition between Protestant and Catholic per- 
sists among the unorthodox ; Santayana was a Catholic free thinker, 
William James a Protestant, however heretical. 

James's doctrine of radical empiricism was first published in 
1904, in an essay called "Does 'Consciousness 9 Exist?" The main 
purpose of this essay was to deny that the subject-object relation 
is fundamental. It had, until then, been taken for granted by 
philosophers that there is a kind of occurrence called "knowing," 
in which one entity, the knower or subject, is aware of another, the 
thing known, or the object. The knower was regarded as a mind 
or soul; the object known might be a material object, an eternal 
essence, another mind, or, in self-consciousness, identical with 
the knower. Almost everything in accepted philosophy was bound 
up with the dualism of subject and object. The distinction of mind 
and matter, the contemplative ideal, and the traditional notion 
of "truth," all need to be radically reconsidered if the distinction 
of subject and object is not accepted as fundamental. 

For my part, I am convinced that James was partly right on this 
matter, and would, on this ground alone, deserve a high place 
among philosophers. I had thought otherwise until he, and those 
who agreed with him, persuaded me of the truth of his doctrine. 
But let us proceed to his arguments. 

Consciousness, he says, "is the name of a nonentity, and Has 
no right to a place among first principles. Those who still cling 
to it are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumour left behind by 
the disappearing 'soul 9 upon the air of philosophy." There is, he 
continues, f 'no aboriginal stuff or quality of being, contrasted with 
'that of which material objects are made, out of which our thoughts 
of them are made." He explains that he is not denying that our 
thoughts perform a function which is that of knowing, and that 
this function may be called "being conscious." What he is denying 
might be pi/t crudely as the view that consciousness is a "thing." 
He holds that there is "only one primal stuff or material," out of 
which everything in the world is composed. This stuff he calk 
"pure experience." Knowing, he says, is a particular sort of rela- 
tion between two portions of pure experience. The subject-object 
relation is derivative: "expericrtee, I believe, has no such inner 
duplicity." A given undivided portion of experience can be in one 
tontext a knower, and in another something known. 



WILLIAM JAMES 

He defines "pure experience" as "the immediate flux of life 
which furnishes the material to our later reflection." 

It will Be seen that this doctrine abolishes the distinction between 
mind and matter, if regarded as a distinction between two different 
kinds o&wbat James calls "stuff." Accordingly those who agree 
with James in this matter advocate what they call "neutral 
monism," according to which the material of which the world is 
constructed is neither mind nor matter, but something anterior 
to both. James himself did not develop this implication of his 
theory; on the contrary, his use of the phrase "pure experience" 
points to a perhaps unconscious Berkeleian idealism. The word 
1 'experience" is one often used by philosophers, but seldom 
defined. Let us consider for a moment what it can mean. 

Common sense holds that many things which occur are not 
"experienced," for instance, events on the invisible side of the 
moon. Berkeley and Hegel, for different reasons, both denied this, 
and maintained that what is not experienced is nothing. Their 
arguments are now held by most philosophers to be invalid 
rightly, in my opinion. If we are to adhere to the view that the 
"stuff" of the world is "experience," we shall find it necessary 
to invent elaborate and implausible explanations of what we mean 
by such things as the invisible side of the moon. And unless we 
are able to infer things not experienced from things experienced, 
we shall have difficulty in finding grounds for belief in the existence 
of anything except ourselves. James, it is true, denies this, but his 
reasons are not very convincing. 

What do we mean by "experience"? The best way to find an 
answer is to ask : What is the difference between an event which is 
not experienced and one which is? Rain seen or felt to be falling is 
experienced, but rain falling in the desert where there is no living 
thing is not experienced. Thus we arrive at our first point: there 
is no experience except where there is life. But experience is not 
coextensive with life. Many things happen to me wtych Ido not 
notice; these I can hardly be said to experience. Clearly I expe- 
rience whatever I remember, but some things which I do not 
explicitly remember may have set up habits which still persist. 
The burnt child fears the fire, even if he has no recollection of 
the occasion on which he was bflrnt. I think we may say that*an 
event is "experienced" when it sets up a habit. (Memory is one 
kind of habit.) Broadly speaking, habits are only set up in living 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

organisms. A burnt poker does not fear the fire, however often 
it is made red-hot. On common-sense grounds, therefore, we shall 
say that "experience" is not coextensive with the "stuff" of the 
world. I do not myself see any valid reason for departing from 
common sense on this point. - ~ 

Except in this matter of "experience/ 9 1 find myself in agree- 
ment with James's radical empiricism. 

It is otherwise with his pragmatism and "will to believe." The 
latter, especially, seems to me to be designed to afford a specious 
but sophistical defence of certain religious dogmas a defence, 
moreover, which no whole-hearted believer could accept. 

The Will to Believe was published in 1896; Pragmatism, a New 
Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking was published in 1907. The 
doctrine of the latter is an amplification of that of the former. 

The Will to Believe argues that we are often compelled, in 
practice, to take decisions where no adequate theoretical grounds 
for a decision exist, for even to do nothing is still a decision. 
Religious matters, James says, come under this head; we have, 
he maintains, a right to adopt a believing attitude although "our 
merely logical intellect may not have been coerced." This is essen- 
tially the attitude of Rousseau's Savoyard vicar, but James's 
development is novel. 

The moral duty of veracity, we are told, consists of two coequal 
precepts: "believe truth," and "shun error." The sceptic wrongly 
attends only to the second, and thus fails to believe various truths 
which a less cautious man will believe. If believing truth and 
avoiding error are of equal importance, I may do well, when 
presented with an alternative, to believe one of the possibilities 
at will, for then I have an even chance of believing truth, whereas 
I have none if I suspend judgment. 

The ethic that would result if this doctrine were taken seriously 
is a very odd one. Suppose I meet a stranger in the train, and 
I ask myself: "Is his name Ebenezcr Wilkes Smith?" If I admit 
that I do not know, I am certainly not believing truly about his 
name; whereas, if I decide to believe that that is his name, there 
is a chance that I may be believing truly. The sceptic, says James, 
is afraid of being duped, and through his fear may lose important 
truth; "what proof is there," he adds, "that dupery through hope 
is so much worse than dupery through fear?" It would seem to 
follow that, if I have been hoping for years to meet a man called 

842 



WILLIAM JAMBS 

Ebenezer Wilkes Smith, positive as opposed to negative veracity 
should prompt me to believe that this is the name of every stranger 
I meet, until I acquire conclusive evidence to the contrary. 

"But/ 9 you will say, "the instance is absurd, for, though you do 
not know the stranger's name, you do know that a very small 
percentage* of mankind are called Ebenezer Wilkes Smith. You 
are therefore not in that state of complete ignorance that is pre- 
supposed in your freedom of choice." Now strange to say, James, 
throughout his essay, never mentions probability, and yet there 
is almost always some discoverable consideration of probability 
in regard to any question. Let it be conceded (though no orthodox 
believer would concede it) that there is no evidence either for or 
against any of the religions of the world. Suppose you are a Chinese 
brought into contact with Confucianism, Buddhism, and Chris- 
tianity. You are precluded by the laws of logic from supposing that 
each of the three is true. Let us suppose that Buddhism and 
Christianity each has an even chance, then, given that both cannot 
be true, one of them must be, and therefore Confucianism must 
be false. If all three are to have equal chances, each must be more 
likely to be false than true. In this sort of way James's principle 
collapses as soon as we are allowed to bring in considerations of 
probability. 

It is curious that, in spite of being an eminent psychologist, 
lames allowed himself at this point a singular crudity. He spoke 
as if the only alternatives were complete belief or complete dis- 
belief, ignoring all shades of doubt. Suppose, for instance, I am 
looking for a book in my shelves. I think, "It may be in this shelf," 
and I proceed to look ; but I do not think, "It is in this shelf* until 
I see it. We habitually act upon hypotheses, but not precisely s$ 
we act upon what we consider certainties; for when we act upon 
an hypothesis we keep our eyes open for fresh evidence. 

The precept of veracity, it seems to me, is not such as James 
thinks. It is, I should say: "Give to any hypothesis which is worth 
your while to consider just that degree of credence which the 
evidence warrants." And if the hypothesis is sufficiently important 
there is the additional duty of seeking further evidence. This is 
plain common sense, and in harmony with the procedure in the 
law courts, but it is quite difljprcnt from the procedure recom- 
mended by James. 

It would be unfair to James to consider his will to believe in 

,843 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

isolation; it was a transitional doctrine, leading by a natural 
development to pragmatism. Pragmatism, as it appears in James, 
is primarily a new definition of "truth." There were two other 
protagonists of pragmatism, F. C. S. Schiller and Dr. John Dewey. 
I shall consider Dr. Dewey in the next chapter; Schiller was of 
less importance than the other two. Between James and Dr. Dewey 
there is a difference of emphasis. Dr. Dewey 's outlook is scientific, 
and his arguments are largely derived from an examination of 
scientific method, but James is concerned primarily with religion 
and morals. Roughly speaking, he is prepared to advocate any 
doctrine which tends to make people virtuous and happy; if it 
does so, it is "true" in the sense in which he uses that word. 

The principle of pragmatism, according to James, was first 
enunciated by C. S. Peirce, who maintained that, in order to attain 
clearness in our thoughts of an object, we need only consider 
what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object may involve. 
James, in elucidation, says that the function of philosophy is to 
find out what difference it makes to you or me if this or that 
world-formula is true. In this way theories become instruments, 
not answers to enigmas. 

Ideas, we are told by James, become true in so far as they help 
us to get into satisfactory relations with other parts of our expe- 
rience: "An idea is 'true* so long as to believe it is profitable to our 
lives." Truth is one species of good, not a separate category. Trutl. 
happens to an idea; it is made true by events. It is correct to say, 
with the intellectualists, that a true idea must agree with reality, 
but "agreeing" does not mean "copying." "To 'agree' in the 
widest sense with a reality can only mean to be guided either 
ftraight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be put into such 
working touch with it as to handle either it or something con- 
nected with it better than if we disagreed." He adds that "the 
true is only the expedient in the way of our thinking ... in the 
long run and on the whole of course." In other words, "our 
obligati&n tc seek truth is pan of our general obligation to do 
what pays." 

In a chapter on pragmatism and religion he reaps the harvest. 
"We cannot reject any hypothesis if consequences useful to life 
flow from it.' 9 "If the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in 
the widest sense of the word, it is true." "We may well believe, 
on the proofs that religious experience affords, that higher powers 

844 



WILLIAM JAMES 

exist and are at work to save the world on ideal lines similar to 
our own." 

I find great intellectual difficulties in this doctrine. It assumes 
that a belief is "true" when its effects are good. If this definition 
is to be useful and if not it is condemned by the pragmatist's 
test we must know (a) what is good, (b) what are the effects of 
this or that belief, and we must know these things before we can 
know that anything is "true," since it is only after we have decided 
that the effects of a belief are good that we have a right to call it 
"true." The result is an incredible complication. Suppose you 
want to know whether Columbus crossed the Atlantic in 1492. 
You must not, as other people do, look it up in a book. You must 
first inquire what are the effects of this belief, and how they differ 
from the effects of believing that he sailed in 1491 or 1493. This 
is difficult enough, but it is still more difficult to weigh the effects 
from an ethical point of view. You may say that obviously 1492 
has the best effects, since it gives you higher marks in examina- 
tions. But your competitors, who would surpass you if you said 
1491 or 1493, may consider your success instead of theirs ethically 
regrettable. Apart from examinations, I cannot think of any prac- 
tical effects of the belief except in the case of a historian. 

But this is not the end of the trouble. You must hold that your 
estimate of the consequences of a belief, both ethical and factual, 
is true, for if it is false your argument for the truth of your belief 
is mistaken. But to say that your belief as to consequences is true 
is, according to James, to say that it has good consequences, and 
this in turn is only true if it has good consequences, and so on 
ad infinitum. Obviously this won't do. 

There is another difficulty. Suppose I say there was such a 
person as Columbus, everyone will agree that what I say is true. 
But why is it true? Because of a certain man of flesh and blood 
who lived 450 years ago in short, because of the causes of my 
belief, not because of its effects. With James's definitiqji, it night 
happen that "A exists" is true although in fact A does not exist. 
I have always found that the hypothesis of Santa Claus "works 
satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word"; therefore "Santa 
Claus exists" is true, although Santa Claus does not exist. James 
says (I repeat): "If the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in 
the widest sense of the word, it is true." This simply omits as 
unimportant the question whether God really is in His heaven; 

45 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

if He is a useful hypothesis, that is enough. God the Architect 
of the Cosmos is forgotten; all that is remembered is belief in 
God, and its effects upon the creatures inhabiting our petty planet. 
No wonder the Pope condemned the pragmatic defence of religion. 

We come here to a fundamental difference between James's 
religious outlook and that of religious people in the past. James 
is interested in religion as a human phenomenon, but shows little 
interest in the objects which religion contemplates. He wants 
people to be happy, and if belief in God makes them happy let 
them believe in Him. This, so far, is only benevolence, not philo- 
sophy; it becomes philosophy when it is said that if the belief 
makes them happy it is "true/* To the man who desires an object 
of worship this is unsatisfactory. He is not concerned to say, "If 
I believed in God I should be happy"; he is concerned to say, "I 
believe in God and therefore I am happy." And when he believes 
in God, he believes in Him as he believes in the existence of 
Roosevelt or Churchill or Hitler; God, for him, is an actual Being, 
not merely a human idea which has good effects. It is this genuine 
belief that has the good effects, not James's emasculate substitute. 
It is obvious that if I say "Hitler exists" I do not mean "the effects 
of believing that Hitler exists are good/" And to the genuine 
believer the same is true of God. 

James's doctrine is an attempt to build a superstructure of belief 
upon a foundation of scepticism, and like all such attempts it is 
dependent on fallacies. In his case the fallacies spring from an 
attempt to ignore all extra-human facts. Berkeleian idealism com- 
bined with scepticism causes him to substitute belief in God for 
God, and to pretend that this will do just as well. But this is only 
a form of the subjectivistic madness which is characteristic of most 
modern philosophy. 



Chapter XXX 
JOHN DEWEY 



JOHN DEWEY, who was born in 1859, is generally admitted 
to be the leading living philosopher of America. In this esti- 
mate I entirely concur. He has had a profound influence, 
only among philosophers, but on students of education, 
aesthetics, and political theory. He is a man of the highest character, 
liberal in outlook, generous and kind in personal relations, inde- 
fatigable in work. With many of his opinions I am in almost com- 
plete agreement. Owing to my respect and admiration for him, 
as well as to personal experience of his kindness, I should wish 
to agree completely, but to my regret I am compelled to dissent 
from his most distinctive philosophical doctrine, namely the sub- 
stitution of "inquiry" for "truth" as the fundamental concept of 
logic and theory of knowledge. 

Like William James, DevVey is a New Englander, and carries 
on the tradition of New England liberalism, which has been aban- 
doned by some of the descendants of the great New Englanders 
of a hundred years ago. He has never been what might be called 
a 'imerc" philosopher. Education, especially, has been in the fore- 
front of his interests, and his influence on American education has 
been profound. I, in my lesser way, have tried to have an influence 
on education very similar to his. Perhaps he, like me, has not 
always been satisfied with the practice of those who pr.ofessed to 
follow his teaching, but any new doctrine, in practice, is bound 
to be subject to some extravagance and excess. This, however, does 
not matter so much as might be thought, because the faults of 
what is new are so much more easily seen than those of what is 
traditional. * 

When Dewey became professor of philosophy at hidtgo in 
1894, pedagogy was included among his subjects. He founded a 
progressive school, and wrote much about education. What he 
wrote at this time was summed up in his book The School and 
Society (1899), which is considered the most influential of all his 
writings. He has continued to wnte on education throughout his 
life, almost as much as on philosophy. 

Other social and political questions have also had a large share 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

of his thought. Like myself, he was much influenced by visits to 
Russia and China, negatively in the first case, positively in the 
second. He was reluctantly a supporter of the first World War. 
He had an important part in the inquiry as to Trotsky's alleged 
guilt, and, while he was convinced that the charges were un- 
founded, he did not think that the Soviet regime would have been 
satisfactory if Trotsky instead of Stalin had been Lenin's successor. 
He became persuaded that violent revolution leading to dictator- 
ship is not the way to achieve a good society. Although very liberal 
in all economic questions, he has never been a Marxist. I heard 
him say once that, having emancipated himself with some difficulty 
from the traditional orthodox theology, he was not going to shackle 
himself with another. In all this his point of view is almost identical 
with my own. 

From the strictly philosophical point of view, the chief impor- 
tance of Dewey's work lies in his criticism of the traditional 
notion of "truth," which is embodied in the theory that he calls 
"instrumentalism." Truth, as conceived by most professional 
philosophers, is static and final, perfect and eternal; in religious 
terminology, it may be identified with God's thoughts, and with 
those thoughts which, as rational beings, we share with God. The 
perfect model of truth is the multiplication table, which is precise 
and certain and free from all temporal dross. Since Pythagons, 
and still more since Plato, mathematics has been linked with 
theology, and has profoundly influenced the theory of knowledge 
of most professional philosophers. Dewey's interests are biological 
rather than mathematical, and he conceives thought as an evolu- 
tionary process. The traditional view would, of course, admit that 
men gradually come to know more, but each piece of knowledge, 
when achieved, is regarded as something final. Hegel, it is true, 
does not regard human knowledge in this way. He conceives 
human knowledge as an organic whole, gradually growing in every 
part, and nit perfect in any part until the whole is perfect. But 
although the Hegelian philosophy influenced Dcwey is his youth, 
it still has its Absolute and its eternal world which is more real 
than the temporal process. These can have no place in Dewey's 
dywght, for which all reality is temporal, and process, though 
evolutionary, is not, as for Hegel, the unfolding of an eternal Idea. 

So far, I am in agreement with Dewey, Nor is this the end of my 
'agreement. Before embarking upon discussion of the points as to 



JOHN OEWET 

which I differ, I will say a few words as to my own view of "truth." 
The first question is: What sort of thing is "true" or "false"? 
The simplest answer would be : a sentence. "Columbus crossed the 
ocean in 1492" is true; "Columbus crossed the ocean in 1776" is 
false. Tkis answer is correct, but incomplete. Sentences are true 
or false, as the case may be, because they are "significant/ 9 and 
their significance depends upon the language used. If you were 
translating an account of Columbus into Arabic, you would have 
to alter "1492" into the corresponding year of the Mohammedan 
era. Sentences in different languages may have the same signifi- 
cance, and it is the significance, not the words, that determines 
whether the sentence is "true" or "false." When you assert a 
sentence, you express a "belief," which may be equally well ex- 
pressed in a different language. The "belief," whatever it may be, 
is what is "true" or "false" or "more or less true." Thus we are 
driven to the investigation of "belief." 

Now a belief, provided it is sufficiently simple, may exist without 
being expressed in words. It would be difficult, without using 
words, to believe that the ratio of the circumference of a circle 
to the diameter is approximately 3.14159, or that Caesar, when he 
decided to cross the Rubicon, sealed the fate of the Roman repub- 
lican constitution. But in simple cases unverbalized beliefs are 
common. Suppose, for instance, in descending a staircase, you 
make a mistake as to when you have got to the bottom: you take 
a step suitable for level ground, and come down with a bump. The 
result is a violent shock of surprise. You would naturally say, "I 
thought I was at the bottom," but in fact you were not thinking 
about the stairs, or you would not have made the mistake. Your % 
muscles were adjusted in a way suitable to the bottom, when in 
fact you were not yet there. It was your body rather than your 
mind that made the mistake -*t least that would be a natural way 
to express what happened. But in fact the distinction between mind 
and body is a dubious one. It will be better to speak of an V organ- 
ism," leaving the division of its activities between the mind and 
the body undetermined. One can say, then: your organism was 
adjusted in a manner which would have been suitable if you had 
been at the bottom, but in fact was not suitable. This failure, of 
adjustment constituted error, did one may say that you were 
entertaining a false belief. 
The test of error in the above illustration is ntrprist. I think thiS 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

is true generally of beliefs that can be tested. A false belief is one 
which, in suitable circumstances, will cause the person enter- 
taining it to experience surprise, while a true belief will not have 
this effect. But although surprise is a good criterion when it is 
applicable, it does not give the meaning of the words-"tFue" and 
"false, 91 and is not always applicable. Suppose you are walking 
in a thunderstorm, and you say to yourself, "I am not at all likely 
to be struck by lightning." The next moment you are struck, but 
you experience no surprise, because you are dead. If one day the 
sun explodes, as Sir James Jeans seems to expect, we shall all 
perish instantly, and therefore not be surprised, but unless we 
expect the catastrophe we shall all have been mistaken. Such illus- 
trations suggest objectivity in truth and falsehood: what is true 
(or false) is a state of the organism, but it is true (or false), in 
general, in virtue of occurrences outside the organism. Sometimes 
experimental tests are possible to determine truth and falsehood, 
but sometimes they are not; when they are not, the alternative 
nevertheless remains, and is significant. 

I mil not further develop my view of truth and falsehood, but 
will proceed to the examination of Dewey's doctrine. 

Dewey does not aim at judgments that shall be absolutely "true/ 9 
or condemn their contradictories as absolutely "false." In his 
opinion there is a process called "inquiry," which is one form gf 
mutual adjustment between an organism and its environment. If 
I wished, from my point of view, to go as far as possible towards 
agreeing with Dewey, I should begin by an analysis of "meaning" 
or "significance." Suppose for example you are at the Zoo, and 
you hear a voice through a megaphone saying, "A lion has just 
escaped." You will, in that case, act as you would if you saw the 
lion that is to say, you will get away as quickly as possible. The 
sentence "a lion has escaped" truant a certain occurrence, in the 
sense that it promotes the same behaviour as the occurrence would 
if you caw y. Broadly: a sentence S "means" an event E if it 
promotes behaviour which E would have promoted. If there has 
in fact been no such occurrence, the sentence is false. Just the 
tame applies to a belief which is not expressed in words. One may 
ajr : a belief is a state of an organism promoting behaviour such 
as a certain occurrence would (footnote if sensibly present; the 
occurrence which would promote this behaviour is the "signifi* 
6uioe" of the belief. This statement is unduly simplified, but it 

850' 



JOHN DEWEY 

may serve to indicate the theory I am advocating. So far, I do not 
think that Dewey and I would disagree very much. But with his 
further developments I find myself in very definite disagreement. 

Dewey makes inquiry the essence of logic, not truth or know- 
ledge. Ije Defines inquiry as follows: "Inquiry is the controlled 
or directed transformation of an indeterminate situation into one 
that is so determinate in its constituent distinctions and relations 
as to convert the elements of the original situation into a unified 
whole." He adds that "inquiry is concerned with objective trans- 
formations of objective subject-matter." This definition is plainly 
inadequate. Take for instance the dealings of a drill-sergeant with 
a crowd of recruits, or of a bricklayer with a heap of bricks; these 
exactly fulfil Dewey's definition of "inquiry." Since he clearly 
would not include them, there must be an element in his notion 
of "inquiry" which he has forgotten to mention in his definition. 
What this element is, I shall attempt to determine in a moment. 
But let us first consider what emerges from the definition as it 
stands. 

It is clear that "inquiry," as conceived by Dewey, is part of the 
general process of attempting to make the world more organic. 
"Unified wholes" are to be the outcome of inquiries. Dewey's love 
of what is organic is due partly to biology, partly to the lingering 
influence of Hegel. Unless on the basis of an unconscious Hegelian 
ftictaphysic, I do not see why inquiry should be expected to result 
in "unified wholes." If I am given a pack of cards in disorder, and 
asked to inquire into their sequence, I shall, if I follow Dewey's 
prescription, first arrange them in order, and then say that this 
was the order resulting from inquiry. There will be, it is true, an 
"objective transformation of objective subject-matter" while I am 
arranging the cards, but the definition allows for this. If, at the 
end, I am told: "We wanted to know the sequence of the cards 
when they were given to you, not after you had re-arranged them," 
I shall, if I am a disciple of Dewey, reply: "Your ideas ^re alto- 
gether too static. I am a dynamic person, and \&en I inquire 
into any subject-matter I first alter it in such a way as to make the 
inquiry easy." The notion that such a procedure is legitimate can 
only be justified by a Hegelian distinction of appearance and reality: 
the appearance may be confused and fragmentary, but the nftlhy 
is always orderly and organic. Therefore when I arrange the cards 
I am only revealing their true eternal nature. But this part of the 

851 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

doctrine is never made explicit. The mctaphysic of organism under- 
lies Dewey's theories, but I do not know how far he is aware of 
this fact. 

Let us now try to find the supplement to Dewey's definition 
which is required in order to distinguish inquiry from othpr kinds 
of organizing activity, such as those of the drill-sergeant and the 
bricklayer. Formerly it would have been said that inquiry is dis- 
tinguished by its purpose, which is to ascertain some truth. But 
for Dewey "truth" is to be defined in terms of "inquiry," not vice 
versa; he quotes with approval Peirce's definition : "Truth" is "the 
opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who inves- 
tigate." This leaves us completely in the dark as to what the 
investigators are doing, for we cannot, without circularity, say that 
they are endeavouring to ascertain the truth. 

I think Dr. Dewey's theory might be stated as follows. The 
relations of an organism to its environment are sometimes satis- 
factory to the organism, sometimes unsatisfactory. When they are 
unsatisfactory, the situation may be improved by mutual adjust- 
ment. When the alterations by means of which the situation is 
improved are mainly on the side of the organism they are never 
wholly on either side the process involved is called "inquiry." 
For example: during a battle you are mainly concerned to alter 
the environment, i.e. the enemy; but during the preceding period 
of reconnaissance you are mainly concerned to adapt your own 
forces to his dispositions. This earlier period is one of "inquiry." 

The difficulty of this theory, to my mind, lies in the severing 
of the relation between a belief and the fact or facts which would 
commonly be said to "verify" it. Let us continue to consider the 
example of a general planning a battle. His reconnaissance planes 
report to him certain enemy preparations, and he, in consequence, 
makes certain counter-preparations. Common sense would say 
that the reports upon which he acts are "true" if, in fact, the 
enemy have made the moves which they are said to have made, 
and that, in that case, the reports remain true even if the general 
subsequently loses the battle. This view is rejected by Dr. Dewey. 
He does not divide beliefs into "true" and "false," but he still 
has two kinds of beliefs, which we will call "satisfactory" if the 
general wins, and "unsatisfactory" if he is defeated. Until the 
btttk has taken place, he cannot tell what to think about the 
flports of his scouts* 



JOHN DEWEY 

Generalizing, we may say that Dr. Dewey, like everyone else, 
divides beliefs into two classes, of which one is good and the other 
bad. He holds, however, that a belief may be good at one time and 
bad at another; this happens with imperfect theories which are 
better than their predecessors but worse than their successors. 
Whether a* belief is good or bad depends upon whether the activities 
which it inspires in the organism entertaining the belief have con- 
sequences which are satisfactory or unsatisfactory to it. Thus a 
belief about some event in the past is to be classified as "good" 
or "bad," not according to whether the event really took place, 
but according to the future effects of the belief. The results are 
curious. Suppose somebody says to me: "Did you have coffee with 
your breakfast this morning?" If I am an ordinary person, I shall 
try to remember. But if I am a disciple of Dr. Dewey I shall say: 
"Wait a while; I must try two experiments before I can tell you." 
I shall then first make myself believe that I had coffee, and observe 
the consequences, if any; I shall then make myself believe that 
I did not have coffee, and again observe the consequences, if any. 
I shall then compare the two sets of consequences, to see which 
I found the more satisfactory. If there is a balance on one side 
I shall decide for that answer. If there is not, I shall have to confess 
that I cannot answer the question. 

But this is not the end of our troubles. How am I to know the 
coifcequences of believing that I had coffee for breakfast? If I say 
"the consequences are such-and-such," this in turn will have to 
be tested by its consequences before I can know whether what I 
have said was a "good" or a "bad" statement. And even if this 
difficulty were overcome, how am I to judge which set of con- 
sequences is the more satisfactory? One decision as to whether 
I had coffee may fill me with contentment, the other with deter- 
mination to further the war effort. Each of these may be considered 
good, but until I have decided which is better I cannot tell whether 
I had coffee for breakfast. Surely this is absurd. , 

Dewey 's divergence from what has hitherto been fegarded as 
common sense is due to his refusal to admit "facts" into his meta- 
physic, in the sense in which "facts" are stubborn and cannot be 
manipulated. In this it may be that common sense is changing, 
and that his view will not seem contrary to what common sen* 
is becoming. 

The main difference between Dr. Dewey and me is that he 

853 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

judges a belief by its effects, whereas I judge it by its causes where 
a past occurrence is concerned. I consider such a* belief "true/ 9 
or as nearly "true" as we can make it, if it has a certain kind of 
relation (sometimes very complicated) to its causes. Dr. Dewey 
holds that it has "warranted assertability" which he substitutes 
for "truth" if it has certain kinds of effects. This* divergence is 
connected with a difference of outlook on the world. The past 
cannot be affected by what we do, and therefore, if truth is deter- 
mined by what has happened, it is independent of present or 
future volitions; it represents, in logical form, the limitations on 
human power. But if truth, or rather "warranted assertability/' 
depends upon the future, then, in so far as it is in our power to 
alter the future, it is in our power to alter what should be asserted. 
This enlarges the sense of human power and freedom. Did Caesar 
cross the Rubicon ? I should regard an affirmative answci as unal- 
terably necessitated by a past event. Dr. Dcwcy would decide 
whether to say yes or no by an appraisal of future events, and there 
is no reason why these future events could not be arranged by 
human power so as to make a negative answer the more satis- 
factory. If I find the belief that Caesar crossed the Rubicon very 
distasteful, I need not sit down in dull despair; I can, if I have 
enough skill and power, arrange a social environment in which 
die statement that he did not cross the Rubicon will have "war- 
ranted assertability." 

Throughout this book, I have sought, where possible, to connect 
philosophies with the social environment of the philosophers con- 
cerned. It has seemed to me that the belief in human power, and 
the unwillingness to admit "stubborn facts/* were connected with 
the hopefulness engendered by machine production and the scien- 
tific manipulation of our physical environment. This view is shared 
by many of Dr. Dewey 's supporters. 'I 'bus George Raymond 
Gciger, in a laudatory essay, says that Dr. Dewey 's method "would 
meaq a revolution in thought just as middle-class and unspectacu- 
lar, but just as stupendous, as the revolution in industry of a 
century ago/ 9 It teemed to me that I was saying the samp thing 
when I wrote "Dr. Dewey has an outlook which, where it is 
distinctive, is in harmony with the age of industrialism and col- 
lective enterprise. It is natural that his strongest appeal should be to 
Americans, and also that he should be almost equally appreciated 
by the progressive elements to countries like China and Mexico/ 9 



JOHN DEWEY 

To my regret and surprise, this statement, which I had sup- 
posed completely innocuous, vexed Dr. Dewey, who replied: 
"Mr. Russell's confirmed habit of connecting the pragmatic theory 
of knowing with obnoxious aspects of American industrialism . . . 
is much as if I were to link his philosophy to the interests of the 
English landed aristocracy/' 

For my part. I am accustomed to having my opinions explained 
(especially by Communists) as due to my connection with the 
British aristocracy, and I am quite willing to suppose that my 
views, like other men's, are influenced by social environment. 
But if, in regard to Dr. Dewey, I am mistaken as to the social 
influences concerned, I regret the mistake. I find, however, that 
I am not alone in having made it. Santayana, for instance, says: 
41 In Dewey, as in current science and ethics, there is a pervasive 
quasi-Hegelian tendency to dissolve the individual into his social 
functions, as well as everything substantial and actual into some- 
thing relative and transitional." 

Dr. Dewey's world, it seems to me, is one in which human 
beings occupy the imagination; the cosmos of astronomy, though 
of course acknowledged to exist, is at most times ignored. His 
philosophy is a power philosophy, though not, like Nietzsche's, 
a philosophy of individual power; it is the power of the community 
tfyjt is felt to be valuable. It is this element of social power that 
seems to me to make the philosophy of instrumentalism attractive 
to those who are more impressed by our new control over natural 
forces than by the limitations to which that control is still subject. 

The attitude of man towards the non-human environment has 
differed profoundly at different times. The Greeks, with their 
dread of hubris and their belief in a Necessity or Fate superior 
even to Zeus, carefully avoided what would have seemed to them 
insolence towards the universe. The Middle Ages carried sub- 
mission much further: humility towards God was a Christian's 
first duty. Initiative was cramped by this attitude and great 
originality was scarcely possible. The Renaissance restored human 
pride, but carried it to the point where it led to anarchy and 
disaster. Its work was largely undone by the Reformation and the 
Counter- reformation. But modern technique, while not altoget^fr 
favourable to the lordly individuat of the Renaissance, has revived 
the sense of the collective power of human communities. Man, 
formerly too humble, begins to think of himself as almost a God.' 

$55 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

The Italian pragmatist Papini urges us to substitute the "Imita- 
tion of God" for the "Imitation of Christ/' 

In all this I feel a grave danger, the danger of what might be 
called cosmic impiety. The concept of "truth" as something depen- 
dent upon facts largely outside human control has been one of the 
ways in which philosophy hitherto has inculcated the necessary 
element of humility. When this check upon pride is removed, a 
further step is taken on the road towards a certain kind of madness 
the intoxication of power which invaded philosophy with Fichte, 
and to which modern men, whether philosophers or not, are prone. 
I am persuaded that this intoxication is the greatest danger of our 
time, and that any philosophy which, however unintentionally, 
contributes to it is increasing the danger of vast social disaster. 



Chapter XXXI 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL ANALYSIS 



IN philosophy ever since the time of Pythagoras there has been 
an opposition between the men whose thought was mainly 
inspired by mathematics and those who were more influenced 
by the empirical sciences. Plato, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, and 
Kant belong to what may be called the mathematical party; Demo- 
critus, Aristotle, and the modem empiricists from Locke onwards, 
belong to the opposite party. In our day a school of philosophy 
has arisen which sets to work to eliminate Pythagoreanism from 
the principles of mathematics, and to combine empiricism wirh 
an interest in the deductive parts of human knowledge. The aims 
of this school are less spectacular than those of most philosophers 
in the past, but some of its achievements are as solid as those of 
the men of science. 

The origin of this philosophy is in the achievements of mathe- 
maticians who set to work to purge their subject of fallacies and 
slipshod reasoning. The great mathematicians of the seventeenth 
century were optimistic and anxious for quick results; conse- 
quently they left the foundations of analytical geometry and the 
infinitesimal calculus insecure. Leibniz believed in actual infini- 
tesimals, but although this belief suited his metaphysics it had 
no sound basis in mathematics. Weierstrass, soon after the middle 
of the nineteenth century, showed how to establish the calculus 
without infinitesimals, and thus at last made it logically secure. 
Next came Georg Cantor, who developed the theory of continuity 
and infinite number. " Continuity " had been, until he defined 
it, a vague word, convenient for philosophers like Hegel, who 
wished to introduce metaphysical muddles into mathematics. 
Cantor gave a precise significance to the word, and showed that 
continuity, as he defined it, was the concept needecf by mathe- 
maticians and physicists. By this means a great deal of mysticism, 
such as that of Bergson, was rendered antiquated. 

Cantor also overcame the long-standing logical puzzles about 
infinite number. Take the series ofcwhole numbers from i onwards; 
how many of them are there? Clearly the number is not finite. 
Up to a thousand, there are a thousand numbers; up to a million,- 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

a million. Whatever finite number you mention, there are evidently 
more numbers than that, because from i up to the number in 
question there are just that number of numbers, and then there 
are others that are greater. The number of finite whole numbers 
must, therefore, be an infinite number. But now corpes^a curious 
fact: The number of even numbers must be the same as the 
number of all whole numbers. Consider the two rows: 

1. a> 3 4* S 6, .... 

2, 4, 6, 8, io, 12, .... 

There is one entry in the lower row for every one in the top row ; 
therefore the number of terms in the two rows must be the same, 
although the lower row consists of only half the terms in the top 
row. Leibniz, who noticed this, thought it a contradiction, and 
concluded that, though there are infinite collections, there are no 
infinite numbers. Georg Cantor, on the contrary, boldly denied 
that it is a contradiction. He was right; it is only an oddity. 

Georg Cantor defined an "infinite" collection as one which has 
parts containing as many terms as the whole collection contains. 
On this basis he was able to build up a most interesting mathe- 
matical theory of infinite numbers, thereby taking into the realm 
of exact logic a whole region formerly given over to mysticism 
and confusion. 

The next man of importance was Fregc, who published his first 
work in 1879, and his definition of "number" in 1884; but, in 
spite of the epoch-making nature of his discoveries, he remained 
wholly without recognition until I drew attention to him in 1903. 
It is remarkable that, before Frege, even' definition of number 
1 that had been suggested contained elementary logical blunders. 
It was customary to identify "number" with "plurality." But an 
instance of "number" is a particular number, say 3, and an instance 
of 3 is a particular triad. The triad is a plurality, but the class of all 
triads-r-which Frege identified with the number 3 is a plurality 
of pluralities, and number in general, of which 3 is an instance, 
is a plurality of pluralities of pluralities. The elementary gram- 
matical mistake of confounding this with the simple plurality of a 
given triad made the whole philosophy of number, before Frege, 
a tissue of nonsense in the ftrictj* sense of the term "nonsense." 

From Frege's work it followed that arithmetic, and pure mathe- 
matics generally, is nothing but * prolongation of deductive logic. 

856 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL ANALYSIS 

This disproved Kant's theory that arithmetical propositions are 
"synthetic" and involve a reference to time. The development of 
pure matiiematics from logic was set forth in detail in Prindpia 
Mathematica, by Whitehead and myself. 

It gradually became clear that a great part of philosophy can be 
reduced to something that may be called "syntax/' though the 
word has to be used in a somewhat wider sense than has hitherto 
been customary. Some men, notably Carnap, have advanced the 
theory that all philosophical problems are really syntactical, and 
that, when etrors in syntax are avoided, a philosophical problem 
is thereby either solved or shown to be insoluble. I think, and 
Carnap now agrees, that this is an overstatement, but there can 
be no doubt that the utility of philosophical syntax in relation 
to traditional problems is very great. 

I will illustrate its utility by a brief explanation of what is called 
the theory of descriptions. By a "description" I mean a phrase 
such as "The present President of the United States/' in which 
a person or thing is designated, not by name, but by some property 
which is supposed or known to be peculiar to him or it. Such 
phrases had given a lot of trouble. Suppose I say "The golden 
mountain does not exist," and suppose you ask "What is it that 
does not exist?" It would seem that, if I say "It is the golden 
m<ymtain," I am attributing some sort of existence to it. Obviously 
I am not making the same statement as if I said, "The round 
square docs not exist." This seemed to imply that the golden 
mountain is one thing and the round square is another, although 
neither exists. The theory of descriptions was designed to meet 
this and other difficulties. 

According to this theory, when a statement containing a phrase 
of the form "the so-and-so" is rightly analysed, the phrase "the 
so-and-so" disappears. For example, take the statement "Scott 
was the author of Waver ley." The theory interprets this statement 
as saying: 

"One and only one man wrote Wavcrky, and that man was 
Scott." Or, more fully: 

"There is an entity c such that the statement '* wrote Waverty 
is true if x is c and false otherwise; moreover c is Scott." . 

The first part of this, before the word "moreover/' is defined 
as meaning: "The author of Waverley exists (or existed or will 
exist)." Thus "The golden mountain does not exist" means: 

$59 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

"There is no entity c such that '* is golden and mountainous' 
is true when * is c, but not otherwise/' 

With this definition the puzzle as to what is meant when we say 
"The golden mountain does not exist" disappears. 

"Existence/* according to this theory, can only be asserted of 
descriptions. We can say "The author of Waverley exists/ 9 but 
to say "Scott exists" is bad grammar, or rather bad syntax. This 
clean up two millennia of muddlc-headedness about "existence/* 
beginning with Plato's TheatMus. 

One result of the work we have been considering is to dethrone 
mathematics from the lofty place that it has occupied since 
Pythagoras and Plato, and to destroy the presumption against 
empiricism which has been derived from it. Mathematical know- 
ledge, it is true, is not obtained by induction from experience; 
our reason for believing that 2 and 2 are 4 is not that we have so 
often found, by observation, that one couple and another couple 
together make a quartet. In this sense, mathematical knowledge 
is still not empirical. But it is also not a priori knowledge about 
the world. It is, in fact, merely verbal knowledge. "3" means 
"2 + i," and "4" means "3 + i." Hence it follows (though the 
proof is long) that "4" means the same as "2 + 2." Thus mathe- 
matical knowledge ceases to be mysterious. It is all of the same 
nature as the "great truth" that there are three feet in a yard, 

Physics, as well as pure mathematics, has supplied material for 
the philosophy of logical analysis. This has occurred especially 
through the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. 

What 19 important to the philosopher in the theory of relativity 
is the substitution of space-time for space and time. Common 
sense thinks of the physical world as composed of "things" which 
persist through a certain period of time and move in space. Philo- 
sophy and physics developed the notion of "thing" into that of 
"material substance/' and thought of material substance as con- 
sisting of prrtsdes, each very small, and each persisting throughout 
all time. Einstein substituted events for particles; each event had 
to each other a relation called "interval/' which could be analysed 
in various ways into a time-element and a space-element. The 
cfeotce between these various ways was arbitrary, and no one of 
them was theoretically preferable to any other. Given two events 
A and B, in different regions, it might happen that stcording to 
one convention they were simultaneous, according to another A 

ftfo 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL ANALYSIS 

was earlier than B, and according to yet another B was earlier than 
A. No physical facts correspond to these different conventions. 

From all this it seems to follow that events, not particles, must 
be the "stuff" of physics. What has been thought of as a particle 
will hav^to J>e thought of as a series of events. The series of events 
that replaces a particle has certain important physical properties, 
and therefore demands our attention; but it has no more sub- 
stantiality than any other series of events that we might arbitrarily 
single out. Thus "matter" is not part of the ultimate material of 
the world, but merely a convenient way of collecting events into 
bundles. 

Quantum theory reinforces this conclusion, but its chief philo- 
sophical importance is that it regards physical phenomena as 
possibly discontinuous. It suggests that, in an atom (interpreted 
as above), a certain state of affairs persists for a certain time, and 
then suddenly is replaced by a finitely different state of affairs. 
Continuity of motion, which had always been assumed, appears 
to have been a mere prejudice. The philosophy appropriate to 
quantum theory, however, has not yet been adequately developed. 
I suspect that it will demand even more radical departures from 
the traditional doctrine of space and time than those demanded 
by the theory of relativity. 

While physics has been making matter less material, psychology 
Idl been making mind less mental. We had occasion in a former 
chapter to compare the association of ideas with the conditioned 
reflex. The latter, which has replaced the former, is obviously 
much more physiological. (This is only one illustration; I do not 
wish to exaggerate the scope of the conditioned reflex.) Yhus from 
both ends physics and psychology have been approaching each 
other, and making more possible the doctrine of "neutral monism" 
suggested by William James's criticism of "consciousness." The 
distinction of mind and matter came into philosophy from religion, 
although, for a long time, it seemed to have valid groiyids. i think 
that both mind and matter are merely convenient ways of grouping 
events. Some single events, I should admit, belong only to material 
groups, but others belong to both kinds of groups, and are there- 
fore at once mental and material. This doctrine effects a gr^at 
simplification in our picture of thfe structure of the world. 

Modern physics and physiology throw a new light upon the 
ancient problem of perception. If there is to be anything that can 

*6i 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

be called "perception/ 9 it must be in some degree an effect of the 
object perceived, and it must more or less resemble the object if 
it is to be a source of knowledge of the object. The first requisite 
can only be fulfilled if there are causal chains which are, to a 
greater or less extent, independent of the rest of the world,, Accord- 
ing to physics, this is the case. Light-waves travel from the sun 
to the earth, and in doing so obey their own laws. This is only 
roughly true. Einstein has shown that light-rays are affected by 
gravitation. When they reach our atmosphere, they suffer refrac- 
tion, and some are more scattered than others. When they reach 
a human eye, all sorts of things happen which would not happen 
elsewhere, ending up with what we call "seeing the sun." But 
although the sun of our visual experience is very different from 
the sun of the astronomer, it is still a source of knowledge as to 
the latter, because "seeing the sun" differs from "seeing the moon" 
in ways that are causally connected with the difference between the 
astronomer's sun and the astronomer's moon. What we can know 
of physical objects in this way, however, is only certain abstract 
properties of structure. We can know that the sun is round in a 
sense, though not quite the sense in which what we see is round ; 
but we have no reason to suppose that it is bright or warm, because 
physics can account for its seeming so without supposing that 
it is so. Our knowledge of the physical world, therefore, is only 
abstract and mathematical. * 

Modern analytical empiricism, of which I have been giving an 
outline, differs from that of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume by tu 
incorporation of mathematics and iu development of a powerful 
t logical technique. It is thus able, in regard to certain problems, 
to achieve definite answers, which have the quality of science 
rather than of philosophy. It has the advantage, as compared with 
the philosophies of the system-builders, of being able to tackle 
its problems one at a time, instead of having to invent at one stroke 
a block theory of the whole universe. Its methods, in this respect, 
resemble those of science. I have no doubt that, in so far as 
philosophical knowledge is possible, it is by such methods that 
it must be sought; I have also no doubt that, by these methods, 
many ancient problems are completely soluble. 

There remains, however, a vfcst field, traditionally included in 
philosophy, where scientific methods are inadequate. This field 
'includes ultimate questions of value; science alone, for example, 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF LOGICAL ANALYSIS 

cannot prove that it is bad to enjoy the infliction of cruelty. What- 
ever can be known, can be known by means of science; but things 
which are legitimately matters of feeling lie outside its province. 

Philosophy, throughout its history, has consisted of two parts 
inharmoniously blended : on the one hand a theory as to the nature 
of the w&rlcl, on the other an ethical or political doctrine as to the 
best way of living. The failure to separate these two with sufficient 
clarity has been a source of much confused thinking. Philosophers, 
from Plato to William James, have allowed their opinions as to 
the constitution of the universe to be influenced by the desire for 
edification: knowing, as they supposed, what beliefs would make 
men virtuous, they have invented arguments, often very sophistical, 
to prove that these beliefs are true. For my part I reprobate this 
kind of bias, both on moral and on intellectual grounds. Morally, 
a philosopher who uses his professional competence for anything 
except a disinterested search for truth is guilty of a kind of 
treachery. And when he assumes, in advance of inquiry, that 
certain beliefs, whether true or false, are such as to promote good 
behaviour, he is so limiting the scope of philosophical speculation 
as to make philosophy trivial; the true philosopher is prepared 
to examine all preconceptions. When any limits are placed, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, upon the pursuit of truth, philosophy 
becomes paralysed by fear, and the ground is prepared for a 
government censorship punishing those who utter "dangerous 
thoughts" in fact, the philosopher has already placed such a 
Censorship over his own investigations. 

Intellectually, the effect of mistaken moral considerations upon 
philosophy has been to impede progress to an extraordinary extent 
I do not myself believe that philosophy can either prove or dis- 
prove the truth of religious dogmas, but ever since Plato mos 
philosophers have considered it part of their business to produce 
"proofs" of immortality and the existence of God. They hav< 
found fault with the proofs of their predecessors St. T^homai 
rejected St. Anselm's proofs, and Kant rejected DeJbartes' bu 
they have supplied new ones of their own. In order to make theii 
proofs seem valid, they have bad to falsify logic, to make mathe- 
matics mystical, and to pretend that deep-seated prejudices were 
heaven-sent intuitions. * 

All this is rejected by the philosophers who make logical analysis 
the main business of philosophy. They confess frankly that the* 

J6 3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

human intellect is unable to find conclusive answers to many ques- 
tions of profound importance to mankind, but they refuse to 
believe that there is some "higher" way of knowing, by which we 
can discover truths hidden from science and the intellect. For this 
renunciation they have been rewarded by the discovery that many 
questions, formerly obscured by the fog of metaphysics, can be 
answered with precision, and by objective methods which intro- 
duce nothing of the philosopher's temperament except the desire 
to understand. Take such questions as: What is number? What 
are space and time? What is mind, and what is matter? I do not 
say that we can here and now give definitive answers to all these 
ancient questions, but I do say that a method has been discovered 
by which, as in science, we can make successive approximations 
to the truth, in which each new stage results from an improvement, 
not a rejection, of what has gone before. 

In the welter of conflicting fanaticisms, one of the few unifying 
forces is scientific truthfulness, by which I mean the habit of basing 
our beliefs upon observations and inferences as impersonal, and 
as much divested of local and temperamental bias, as is possible 
for human beings. To have insisted upon the introduction of this 
virtue into philosophy, and to have invented a powerful method 
by which it can be rendered fruitful, are the chief merits of the 
philosophical school of which I am a member. The habit of careful 
veracity acquired in the practice of this philosophical method tan 
be extended to the whole sphere of human activity, producing, 
wherever it exists, a lessening of fanaticism with an increasing 
capacity of sympathy and mutual understanding. In abandoning 
a part of ris dogmatic pretensions, philosophy does not cease to 
1 suggest and inspire a way of life. 



86V 



INDEX 



Aaron, 461 

Abbasid dynasty, 442 

Abdera, 84, 97 

Abdon, 380 

Abel, 380, 461 

Abelard, Pierre, 453 ., 457-60, 461 

Abraham, 304, 348 

Absolute, 758-61, 769, 822, 848 

absolute equality, 160, 161 

absolute monarchy, 441, 655 

absolute space, 89, 91 

absolutist development, 744 

abstract ideas, 830, 83 1 

Abu \>qub Yusuf, 446 

Abyssinia, 338, 389 

Academicians, Academics, 369, 381, 

461 
Academy of Athens, 80, 182, 231, 

258, 259, 261, 276, 282, 300 
acceleration, 553, 554, 556, 500, 561 
Achaeans, 25, 26 
Achilles and the Tortoise 834 
acquired characteristics, 753 
Acragas, 72. 75. 3*6 
action, 222, 821, 826-8, 834. 838 
actuality, 189, 192, 704 
^am, 478, 578, 594, 613, 616; and 

St. Augustine, 378, 370, 3&T, 

kings as heirs of, 643, (144, 646 
adaptation, 820 
Adcimantus, 137, 144 
Adrlhard of Flith, 235, 460, 487 
aJjvi'tivcs, 185, 186 
Advance **fnt of Learning. The 

(Bacon). 564 
Ai'Kospourni, 101 
/KnciU, 380 
Acneaidemus, 261 
Aeschylus, 77, 100, 231 
aesthetics, 54, 701 
Aetius, 238 
Africa, 281, 320, 386, 401, 642; 

and Arabs, 299, 326, 440; and 

St. Augustine 354. 364. 3^7* 

371 ; and monasticism, 396; and 

Rome, 191, 304 
after life, 25, 40-2, 109, 269-70,* 

272-4, 280-1, 499, 500. Se* also 

immortality 

f 865 



Against Celsus (Origen), 347, 348 n. 

Agatharcus, 231 

Agathon, no 

Agilulph, 403 

Agnes of Poitou, 433 

agnosticism, 730 

agriculture, 22, 24, 29, 33, 341, 658, 
714, 755J Arab, 443; Greek and 
Roman, 26, 243, 294, 295, 301 ; 
and monasticism, 396, 432 

Agrippina, 282 

Ahab, 329 

Ahriman, 499 

Ahura Mazda, 499 

Aigisthos, 30 

Ailly, Pierre d', 495 n. 

air, 46, 47, 62, 63, 73, 74, 229, 230, 

269, 276; and Plato, 166-9 
| air pump, 554, 557 
! Alaric, 387, 421, 747 
j Alberic of Tusculurn, 432 

Albertus Magnus, St., 445, 472, 

j 474. 501 

i Albi^enses, 464, 468, 470, 472 

j AJbumazar, 487 

alchemy, 53, 62, 306, 343, 444. 4*8, 
486 

Alcibiades, 1 10, 799 

Alcuin, 413. 4H-I5 

Alexander II, Pope, 435 

Alexander III, Pope, 454 n. 

Alexander VI, Pope, 519. 526, 527, 

529 

Alexander the grammarian, 288 9 
Alexander the Great, 241-4, *53 
333. 615, 766; and Aristotle, 182, 
183, 207, 215, 299; cities founded 
by, 248, 249; conquests of, 31 ., 
248, 204, 302; effect of, 120, 183, 
241-2, 248-9. 296, 304-5, 490, 
524 ; and politics,*?29, 622 
Alexander the Paphlagoni.m, 303 
Alexander the Platonist, 288 
Alexander Severus, 303 
Alexandria, 233, 244, 248, 255, 31 1 ; 
and Christianity, 346, 3^-3. 
387, 410, 411; and culture, 80, 
240, 246, 306, 346; and Jews, 
330, 337. 341 . 

2E 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Alfarabi, 487 

Alfred the Great, 402, 423 

Algazel, 447 

algebra, 54, 306, 444. 5^3. 689 

Ali, son-in-law of Mohammed, 442 

almsgiving, 328, 334, 349 

alphabet, 28 

Alphonso V, King of Aragon, 506, 
520 

Amasis II, 48 

Ambrose, St., 354"$o, 39*. 575. 810 ; 
and St. Augustine, 327, 360, 363, 
369, 370, 371 ; and Church and 
State, 327, 355. 3*3. 4p2, 4". 
434* 5i influences philosophy, 
3*7 

America, 215, 521, 646, 657, 662, 
663. 664, 671, 804; and Chris- 
tianity, 309; and culture, 04, 95, 
705, 746, 817; and Hegel, 757, 
765; and liberalism, 623, 668; 
and Locke, 577, 655, 656. Set 
alto United States 

American philosophy, 839, 847, $55 
American Revolution, 511, 67 1 , 

75<>. 798 

Ammon, 242 

Ammonias Saccas, 311, 346 

amnesia, 825 

Amsterdam, 570, 592 

Anabaptists, 382, 545. 577. <2i 

Anacreon, 49 

Anagni, 502, 503 

analysis, #57-^4 

analytical empiricism, 862 

analytical geometry. 857 

Analytic* (Agstodc), 462 

anarchism, 514, 624, 789 

Inarchy, 515, 577. 57*>, 579 

Anastasius bibtiothtoinus, 424 

Anaxagoras, 7#* 81*3, 95, 227; and 
other philosophers, 84. K6, 92 , 
107; as scientist, 73, 87, 236, $58 

Anaxiirander, 45-6, 63, 134, t(x>, 

AnaKunenes, 46, 47, 62, 83, 377 

Ancients, 534 

Ancona, 519 

Andalusia, 386 

ngels, 338. 377* 37*. 4& 

Angelus StJesms, 7*4 

Angilbert, St., 413 

Anifcs, 406, 421 ! 



Anglicans, 626 

Angus, C. F., 251, 350 . 

animal faith, 226 

animism, 558 

Awchawtng. 734, 739 

Anselm, St., 327, 437"9. 457. 45. 

488; and God, 60 8 ,,609, 669, 814, 

863 

Anselm of Laon, 458 
Antalcidas, Peace of, 31 n. 
Anthony, St., 395 
anthropology, 658 
Antichrist, 381/508, 779 
Antigonus I, 244 
antinomies, 735 
Antioch, 244, 404, 410, 411 
Amiochus 1, 245, 250 
Antiochui III, 249 
Antiochuft IV Kpiph.trus, 334, n$, 

3? 6 
Anttochus of A sea Km, 2*>i 

Antiphon, 149, 233 

antiquity: contrasted uith nicJi- 

aeval world, 323; and ob^cn.i- 

uun, 552; and Rctiuiwano, 510; 

late, and religion, 351; btr, and 

subjectivism, 728 
anti-Srmitism, 210. 342, 345, 34'). 

709, 79~a 
Anusthcnrs, 254 
antitl)csta, 759 

Antoninus PIU&, 2H4 ** 

Antonius, Marcuji (M,trk Anror 

34i 

ants, 821 

AphrcxJitc, 74. 75 
A|xxr>pha, 333 4 
Apollo, 48, 24 S, 3V<^ 
Apollcmmt of AicirtfJti.i A ,240, 24' 
Apullonius ^f IVrtt, 238 
Apollortiu of T)an;i, 304 
,-l/Wojt r I'll to), 104-9, in, 1 1 4. 

246 

Apofttks. I7<, 45^. 47Z. 5<>7 

A frrtoFi knottlcdyc, 161, ^15, 683, 



733. 9, H6o 

Ac|uifiat, St. Thomas, 56, 47 j, 474* 
85, 489, 547* 6o, M*. *>*4. 7. 
857; and Arittutlr, 309, 474 7- 
47^, 4o ( 4*J. 4^*4. 494. 501 i *r*d 
t>rsoirtc f 5^2, 5^9; atul rtlm*, 
480-2, afJ 1 rmnt J*c< > plakita- 
phrn, 4**. 4^<*>; and God. 



866 fl 



INDEX 



Aquinas, St. Thomas contd. 
434, 438, 447, 476-82, 484, 608, 
863; influence of, 322, 324, 439, 
473. 483-5 J and labour theory of 
value, 660; and Occam, 494, 496; 
and ontological argument, 476, 
8x4, 815; and truth, 476, 478, 
485; and universals, 478, 480, 
484, 496 

Arab conquests, 326, 389, 440 

Arab Empire, 441 

Arab mystics, 446 

Arab philosophy, 45 . 465. 474~5, 
496-7, 521 

Arabia, 441 

Arabian Mights, The, 442 

Arabic language, 234-5, 343. 443. 
46*, 465, 486, 849 

Arabic numerals, 307, 444 

Arab*, 234, 299, 306, 442-3, 486-8, 

529 

Arapon, 463, 506, 520 
Arcadia, 32, 117, 299, 363 
AreesiLms, 258, 259 
Archebus, King of Macedon, 207 
Archimedes, 227, 233, 237, 240. 246 
Architecture, 428, 432, 509, 704 
Archy las of Tunis, x 39 
Argenteuil, 458 
Argonaut*, 537 
4rpumentft for God, 608-12, 717- 

18, 735-6. See also ontological 



Arianisin, 323, 358, 389, 392, 404. 
4<>5, 49. 459; Cpnstantine and, 
349. 35 ; doctrine of, 352-3; 
dominates Western Empire, 353, 

354 
Amtarchus of Samns. 153. 237-9, 

245, 246. 2So, 282, 54*, 549. 55 
Arittodemuft f no, 118 
Aristophanes, 77. 100, 10*!, 105, 137 
Aristotle, 3$, 233, 283, 390, 449; 

and Alexander, 1X2-3, 207, 299; 



Aristotle contd. 
487; cheerful and optimistic, 39- 
40, 191, 202, 205, 253, 255; and 
Democritus, 85, 86; and Empe- 
docles, 73, 76; ethics of, 195- 
206; and God, 189, 190-1, 194, 
202, 203, 214, 373. 477, 478, 484, 
608; on the Greeks, 209, 214, 
242; harm done by, 93; and 
Hobbes, 568, 574, 577; and 
individualism, 622; influence of, 
121, 182, 205-6, 225, 230, 499, 
623 ; knowledge of, 307, 343, 439, 
462, 499, 501 ; on Leucippus, 84, 
88; logic of, 182, 218-25, 445, 
513, 6x5; metaphysics of, 182- 
94, 204, 218, 221; and modern 
philosophy, 534, 557, 580, 608, 
631. 719. 76i, 7*8, 814; and 
Mohammedans, 443, 444. 445. 
447; physics of, 226-30; and 
Plato, 80, 125, 182, 184, 199, 

202, 205, 210-ix, 218, 242, 306, 
307 ; and Platonic theory of ideas, 
150, 184, 1 88; and politics, 201- 
2, 207-17, 299, 530, 813; and 
Renaissance, 218, 521, 537, 547; 
and scholastic philosophy, 426, 
439, 451, 456, 459. 461, 472, 483- 
4, 487, 494. 507, 513; and 
science, 93, 182, 580, 857; and 
soul, x88, 192-4. 309, 317, 480, 
585. 59o; on Sparta, n6, 117, 
xi 9-20; and universals, 185-6, 
1 88, 478, 814; cited, 183 n., 
200 ft , 202. 208-9, 211-15, 235 ft. ; 
quoted, 88, 89, tiQ, 185, 190, 
xgx, 192, 193, 194, 196-8, 2*1, 

203, 208-9, 212-13, 215, 228 
arithmetic, 21 n. t 54, 55, 221, 586, 

689, 740, 857-8; and the Greeks, 
49 n. t 53, 152, 153, x66, x68, 177, 
232, 236, 313 
Anus, 352-3 



Arnauld, Antoine, 605, 608, 614, 

616 
Arnold, Matthew, 72 



and Anaximandcr, 46, 235 ' and Army, of Rome, 297, 298, 302, 303, 
ancient philosophy, 44, 4Q . 64, 304, 308, 352, 363 
2, 237, 253. 355. 257. 287, 311; 
and Aquinas, 309, 324, 475*9, 
480, 4 3. 484; and astronomy 

153, 204, 229-30. *35. 555 anjj Arnod, Thomas, 114 n. 
Averroes, 447; and Francis Arnold of Brescia, 453, 462 
Ikcon, 566; and Catholic philo- Arrian, 287 
sophy, 218, 368, 377* 461, 472, arrow, Zeno's, 832-4 

86? 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Artemis, 23, 25, 30, 388 
asceticism, 323, 370, 396, 397. 499. 
784, 805; in ancient world, 35, 
39. 61. 156, 254 
Asdepius, 163 

Asia, 165, 246, 249, 353. 468, 5&>. 
642, 704; and Alexander. 243-5 J 
and culture, 419; religions of, 23, 
56, 302, 781 

Asia Minor, 43, 246; and Greeks, 
26, 31, loo, 119, 120, 241, 246; 
and Persia, 31 ft., 78 ; refipons of, 
23,24 
Asoka, 245 
Aspasia, 81, 95 
Assassins, 444 
association and habit, 692 
association of ideas, 802, 861 
Assur-bani-pal, 250 
Assyrians, 329 

astrology, 23, 53, 343. 4-f 8 , 714; 
and Arabs, 306, 444; and St. 
Augustine, 369, 377; and Greek 
philosophy, 250, 261, 270, 279, 
319; in Renaissance, 516, 523; 
and scholastic philosophy, 481, 
488 

astronomy, 53, 66, 338, 369, 4*>8. 
586, 714, 860-2; and ancient 
philosophy, 44, 73, 152, 166-8, 
joo, 204, 229-30, 235-40, 280, 
548, 550, 552; and Copernicus, 
548, 550, 55* I id Galileo, 553; 
and mathematics, 152-3, 235; 
and modem philosophy, 547. 
55*-7, 55*. 5&>, 7431 and 
Mohammedan*, 444, 448 ; Ptolc- 
maic, 218, 537 
<*U, 30 

Athanasiun, St., 352, 353, 396 
atheism, 81, 107, 57<>, 592, 667, 

816 

Athens, 136, 139, 158, 287, 422; in 
age oftPericle*, 160, 216, 287; 
and culture, ( 28, 40, 79-80, 81, 
09, 130, 183, 305 ; democracy in, 
94* 103, 108, 135, 212; in fifth 
century, 99-101 ; St. Paul in, 424 ; 
philosophers in, 81, 83, 84, 182, 
183, 258, 263, 264, 300. 393: 
Protagoras in, 84, 96. 97; and 
religion, 32, 3$, 40; and Rome, 
59, 261 ; and Socrates, 102, 154, 



Athens could. 

216; and Sparta, 31 *., 114, 119, 
123, 125, 254 

Atlantic Ocean, 281, 732 

Atlantis, 165 

atom(s), 53, 65-6, 85-6, 91, 92, 169, 
269; and quantum theory, 86 1 

atomic theory, 87-8, oa, 188 

atomism, 47, 84-^3, 311, 457, 754. 
812 

Atrcus, 30 

Attica, 41, 78, 79, xoo, 264 

Attila, 386-7, 388, 394, 421 

Aupiifttinc (of Canterbury), St., 
406 

Aupustinr (of Hippo), St., 56, 294, 
338, 353, 35&. 364-71, 427 , 
435. 461, 719, 776; and St. 
Ambrose, 360, 364, 369, 371; 
and Aquinas, 475, 482, 494; and 
Church and State, 324, 348, 363, 
382, 767; and City of God, 288, 
324, 374-83. 55 : and Descarte*, 
58?, 5*9; and Erasmus, 534, 538; 
and F ranctscan ph ilotophc rs ; 
488, 494; and God, 373, 377; 
and St. Jerome, 360, 380; and 
lather, 354, 538; and Mani- 
cha'ism, 344, 364, 368-9, 370, 
37>, 372; and monasticism, 396; 
and Occam, 494 ; and original sin, 
383-5* 480; and Pelagian con- 
troversy, 383-5, 423; and philo- 
sophy, '322, 324, 360, 372- 3. - 
438, 45 497, 50, 784; and 
Plato, 309, 370, 372, 37<>, 377. 
475, 5<>9; arul politics. 327, 363; 
and Reformation, 354, 366, 382, 
544-5, 546; and Renaissance, 
519; and sin, 364-7; and sub- 
jectivism, 374. 728 . and theology, 
354, 366, 383, 544-5'. <* ""^i 
373-4 

Augustus, 271, 2>5 7, 341 

Austen, Jane, 705 

Austria, 646, 765 

Avrrroes, 192, 445, 44*-7. 474, 
480, 487, 4&K, 4<X>, 497, 564 

Avicenna (or Ibn Sinn). 444-5, 447, 
487,4*8,4*5.496 

Xvijfnon, 325, 491, 53, 5<H, 505, 

506 
**ims t 55, 58, ajj 



868 * 



INDEX 



Babylon, 22, 207, 329-30, 331 
Babylonia, 21 ., 22-4, 27, 44, 235, 

428, 499; and Greeks, 47, 231, 
235, 241, 250, 302 

Babylonian captivity, 382 
Dacchae (Euripides), 33, 38, 
Bacchus,* 3 2-3, 34-8, 61 
Bacon, Francis, 285, 563-7, 568, 

569, 749 

Bacon, Sir Nicholas, 563 
Bacon, Roger, 473, 4Sf*8 
bacteria, 557 
Bactria, 241, 245 
Baghdad, 442 
Bailey, Cyril, S6n.,S9n.. <;i ., 263, 

267 ., 268 n. 
Bakunin, M. A., 514 
Ball, John, 508 
Balliol College, 507 
baptism, 328, 350, 366, 384, 385, 

429, 482 

barbarian invasions, of Rome, 217, 
320, 323, 327, 354. 3^3. 3*H>. 394, 
765 

barbarians, in \\estem Kmpire, 

323. 324. 325. 32**. 440 
Barbirossa. .SVe Frederick I 
liardas, 416 
barometer, 557 
Barth, 281 n. 
Ousel, 538, 788 Council of, 506, 

Basil, St., jgO 
Jlasil I, 416 
Bavaria, 581 
Ha ylc, Pierre. 564, 581 
beans, 50, 76 
Beatific Viwon, 785 
beauty, 308, 309, 314, 35. 3 '&, 

39 

Be cc aria. Hot 

Becket, Thomas a, St., 4^ 
Ixrtroming, 68, 760, 822 

Bede, St., 4U 

bees, 821 

behaviourists, 802 

being, 74, 312-3, 489, 496, 760 

Bel, 242, 250 

l*lief(), 329, 348. 438, 489, 493, 
709, 804, 852, 853, 863; an^ 
behaviour, 849-53: and Hume, 
691 , 697-9 ; in progress, 754 ; a* 
Protestants, 493 in *ci^nce, 729; 



belief(s) contd. 

and truth, 849-53. See also will 
to believe 

Bellarmine, St. Robert, 643 

Bcloch, Karl Julius, 28 n., 40 

Benedict, St., 389, 397-400, 406 

Benedict IX, Pope, 432 

Benedictine Order, 400 

Benedictine rule, 397, 400, 414, 432 

benevolence, 206, 290 

Benn, A. W., quoted, 183, 254, 303 

Bcntham, Jeremy, 92, 252, 750, 
751, 756, 796, 802-5, 808, 809, 
8 1 1 ; and Epicurus, 268, 274; and 
God, 638 ; and justice, 205 ; and 
liberalism, 623, 667, 817; and 
Locke, 629, 637, 666; politics 
and economics of, 808 

Berbers, 440 

Berengar of Tours, 437 

Bcrgson, Henri, 819-38; and causa- 
tion, 690; and evolution, 820-1; 
and intuition, 821, 825-6, 831; 
and memory, 824-5, 826, 834-6; 
mysticism of, 857 ; and space and 
time, 823, 824, 827, 829-35; *"d 
will, 787 

Berkeleian idealism, 841, 846 

Berkeley, George, 673-84, 728, 
841 ; and ego, 687, 689; and em- 
piricism, 568, 728, 862 ; and God, 
669, 673; and Hume, 685, 686; 
and Locke, 630, 666, 739; and 
politics, 629, 667 ; and subjectiv- 
ism, 513, 739 ; and substance, 687 

Berlin, 747. 757, 782 

Bermudas, 673 * 

Bern, 717 

Bernard, St., 432, 453, 458, 459~6i 

Berosus, 250 

Bertha, daughter of Charlemagne, 

413 

Bessarion, 521 

Bethlehem, 361 m * 

Bevan, Kdwyn, 59 ., 245, 249 ., 
258, 262, 281 n., 282 n.. 333 

Beyond Good and Evil (Nietzsche), 
790, 792 

Bible, 229, 534, $82, 653; and 
Copernicus, 230, 550; and Eras- 
mus, 534, 537; and Jewish his- 
tory, 332, 338; and St. Jerome, 
354, 360. 36i 



869 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



biblical criticism, 592 

big business, 671 

biology, 192, 228, 746, 754. 831, 
851 

birth control, 481, 750 

bishops, 396, 401, 428, 430, 494, 
644 ; and investiture struggle, 433, 
436-7; power of, 349, 418, 430; 
and papacy, 402-3, 410, 414, 
416-17, 433. 45L 452. 504. See 
also episcopate 

Bismarck, Prince, 747, 748, 779 

Black Death, 491 

Black Sea, 79 

Blake, William, 338, 704, 705 

Boadicea, 283 

Boccaccio, Giovanni, 455, 521 

body, 157, 347, 4*7, 629, 697, 783, 
849; and St. Augustine, 378-9, 
381; and Bergson, 821-2; and 
Cartesians, 583-4. 5&7. 5 8 9; and 
Plotinus, 314, 317; and Socrates, 

15677 

Boethius, 234, 324, 356, 389, 39-2. 
460; and mediaeval philosophy, 

439 

Boghaz-Keui, 26 
Bogomiles, 469 
Bohemia, 470, 509 
Bokhara, 445 
Boleyn, Anne, 539 
Bolingbroke, Viscount (Henry St. 

John), 667 

Bologna, 437, 455. 79 
Bonaparte. See Napoleon I 
Bonaventura,, St., 486, 488 
Boniface, St., 414 
Loniface VIII, Pope, 489, 502-3 
Book of Knock, 337-9, 340 
Borgia family, 544 
Borgia, Caesar, 519. 526-7, 5*8, 

789 

Bosanquet, Bernard, 748 
Botiuet, lacqur* Benigne, 715 
Boswell, James, 273 
Boyle, Robert, 557 
Bradley, F. H., 4*5 *. 43*. 604, 

608,748 

Brahe, Tycho, 550 i 
Brahms, 785 
brain, 825, 827, 836 
Bramhall, John. Bishop of Derry, 



Brazil, 646 

Britain, 283, 386, 401, 414 
British philosophy, 618; and 
Continental philosophy, 668- 

? 2 * o 

Bnttany, 457, 458, 5^0 ^ 

Bromios, 38 

bronze, 24, 26 

Brook Farm, 705 

brotherhood of man, 254, 286, 287, 

288, 305 

Browne, Sir Thomas, 558 
Brunichild, 403 
Bruno of Cologne, St., 432 
Bruno of Toul. See l>eo IX 
Brutus, 492, 527 
Buchanan, George, 643 
Buddha, 31, 782, 790-800 
Buddhism, 241, 245, 249, 720. 781, 

785. 793. 799. 843 
Bulgaria, 469 
bull, 23, 32, 350 
bull-fights, 25 

Burckhardt, Jakob, 522 n., 523 n. 
BurRhlcy, Lord. See Cecil 
Buridan's ass, 235 
Burke, Edmund, 717 
Burnct, John, 52, 102 ; cited, 44 *., 

86 n., 105; quoted, 41, 51, 68 n., 

84-5, 89 w., 102 

Bums, C. Delisle. 411-12 * 

Burt, Dr., 706 
Burn, 1C. A., 549 
Bury, J. B., 95. '4 ".. 117-1* 
Butler, Samuel, 310 
Byron, George Gordon, lx>rd, 505, 

624, 705, 708, 774-80; heroes of, 

670, 777; and liberalism. 667, 

774; and nationalism, 709, 779; 

and Nietzsche, 777, 789; and 

romanticism, 708, 746, 780; 

quoted, 709, 723. 776, 777, 778 

780 
Byzantine culture, as transmitter, 

44* 

Byzantine Empire, 298, 401, 405, 
441, 501 ; and Gregory the Grrst. 
324, 402; and Ixxnbards, 326, 
394, 408, 409; nd papacy, 4?*- 
10, 416. See a/to Eastern Em- 
pire 

Byzantine scholarship, and Rrnats- 



870 



INDEX 



Caesar, Julius, 294, 295, 492, 527, 

849 

Cagliari, 402 
Cain, 380, 777 
calculus, 233, 558, 605, 619, 831, 

8 57 . . 
calendar, 444 

Caliban, 537 

California, 647, 674 

Caliphate, 419, 441,442 

Calixtus II, Pope, 452 

Callicles, 99 

Callinicus, exarch of Italy, 403 

Calvin, John, 210, 354, 384, 544, 

550, 608, 648 

Calvinism, 621, 645, 715, 776 
Camaldolese Order, 432 
Cambrai, League of, 517 
Cambyses II, 48 
Campania, 311 
Campion, Edmund, 643 
Canada, 715 
canon law, 464 
Canossa, 436, 747 
Cantor, Gcorg, 857-8 
Cape route to India, 517, 521 
capital, 209-10, 817 
capitalism, 283, 383, 638, 658-9, 

671, 709, 809, 811, 8x6, 817 
Carbonari, 775 
Carcassonne, 470 
Carlyle, Thomas, 312, 624, 667, 

754. 7/8-9, 80 1, 807 
> Camap, 859 
Cameades, 259, 260, 261, 262, 299, 

377 ., 593 

Carolingian renaissance, 414-15,428 
Carolingians, 408, 415, 428 
Cartesianism, 474, 585. S&6 ., 59 

624, 690, 693. See alto Descartes 
Carthage, 49*-. 72, 140, 207, 243, 

367, 369, 440; and Rome, 260, 

294, 295 

Carthusians, 432, 538 
Casstua, 492 

categorical imperative, 737-8 
CaUgoriet, The (Aristotle), 222, 

439. 495 

category, -ies, 222-3, 734~5 
Cathari, 468-9. See alto Albigense^ 
cathedral schools, 461 
Catherine of Aragon, 539 
Catherine II, 803 

'87 



Catholic Church, 94, 305, 705, 715; 
claim to supremacy of, 767 ; and 
dictatorships, 642, 646. See also 
Church 

Catholic faith, in Western Empire, 

353, 354* 393. 395 

Catholic orthodoxy, 93, 538 

Catholic philosophy, 322-510, 628; 
and Aquinas, 472-3, 474, 483-4; 
and Aristotle, 218, 472, 473, 474; 
in eleventh century, 439; and 
history, 326-7; and pseudo- 
Dionysius, 424; in twelfth cen- 
tury, 450-62; in thirteenth cen- 
tury, 463-73 ; two periods of, 322 

Catholicism, 839-40 

Cato the Elder, 259-61, 301, 334, 
376 

causal laws in physics, 695 

causality, causation, 86, 683, 744; 
and Hume, 689-96, 729, 731; 
and Kant, 741 

cause-and-ciTect, 734 

cause(s): and belief, 845, 854; and 
Aristotle, 191, 205; and Francis 
Bacon, 565; and Newton, 560; 
and Plato, 167. See also final 
cause ; First Cause ; prime causes 

cave, Plato's 76, 126, 147, 152 

Cebes, 160, 162 

Cecrops, 288 

celibacy, 156, 481 ; of clergy, 133, 
430-1 , 434, 435 

Celsus, 347-8 

censorship, 863 

Chalcedon, Council^of, 352, 388, 

393 

Chaldeans, 250, 275 * 

Chalons, 387, 388 
Chamber of Deputies (France), 664 
chance, 74. 76, 82, 86, 276 
change(s), 64, 65, 70, 74, 7.6, 88; 
and Bergson, 833-4; denied by 
Eleatics, 833 ; and Henfclitus, 62, 
64, 67, 833; mathematical con- 
ception of, 832, 833, 834; and 
Parmenidea, 67, 70, 71, 126; and 
Plato, 126, 165, 180-1. See also 
flux 

Chanut, 582 ' 

Charlemagne, 408,414-13, 747; and 
culture, 327, 413, 415. &e also 
Carolingian renaissance ' 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Charles V, Emperor, 5x7, 520, 526, 

Charles I of England, 626, 642, 

643, 662 
Charles II of England, 569, 626, 

654 
Charles II (the Bald) of France, 

415, 421, 422, 423, 424 
Charles VIII of France, 516, 520 
Charles Mattel, 409, 414 
Charles, R. H., 336 n., 337 n., 339- 

40 
Charlotte, Queen of Prussia, 606, 

613 

Charmide* (Plato), 1 1 1 
Chartres, 460, 461 
chastity, 397, 43. 7$5 
checks and balances, 529, 530, 577, 

661-5 

cheerfulness, 64, 92 
chemistry, 53, 62, 65, 87, 306, 448, 

557, 695, 746 
Childe Harold, 776 
China, 22, 243, 305. 443, 560, 646, 

762, 848, 854; classics of, 456; 

and Greece, 32; Nestorianism m, 

388; in 600-1000, 419 
Chosen People, 328, 331, 344 
Christ, 304, 345. 348. 358, 3<>i -3. 

370, 404, 465, 470, 49* 5^5. 53 6 ; 

and Aristotle, 472; death of, 

154 ., 378; and ethics, 139, 602; 

and Jews, 339, 340, 342, 343, 

345. 347; nature of, 347, 387-9, 

482; and Nazis, 383; and the 

Pope, 461; and poverty, 363, 

542 ; and sin, 339 ; oul of, 497 n. ; 

as Word or Logos, 56, 313. Ser 

alto Jesus; Messiah 
Christian dogma(t), 154, 200, 277, 

4^2, 839 
Christian ethics, in, 197, 199, 200, 

*5 795 

Christian Vnoralstu, 201 

Christian philosophy: and belirf, 
348; Aristotle accorded supre- 
macy in, 218; development of, 
500-1; dualism of, 590; Plato* 
nic till thirteenth century, 125, 

439 

Christian Providence, top 
Christian republic, within Roman 

Empire, 350 



Christian theology: absorbs six- 
teenth century, 547; and Aqui- 
nas, 438, 483-4; and arguments 
for God, 608 ; and Francis Bacon, 
564; and Boethius, 389; and 
creation, 46, 318; develops with 
Hellenization, 346; early dis- 
putes in, 352; and Emperor, in 
sixth century, 393 ; and evil, 170; 
and German idealists, 731; of 
Gospels, 346 ; has two parts, 365 ; 
and heliocentric theory, 550; and 
Irish culture, 422; of Jesuits, 
546; and John the Scot, 423, 425, 
426; and Lan franc, 437; and 
mathematics, 56; and mystery 
religions, 32, 34, 351; and Oc- 
cam, 4Q2ff.\ and papal revenues, 
522; and St. Peter Dam tan, 437; 
and Plato, 34, 125, 152, 308-9, 
501; and Plotinus, 308, 316; 
political importance of, after 
Constantine, 352-3; and Pro- 
testants, 538; and Renaissance, 
262, 522; and self, 688; and 
science, 559 

Christianity, 309, 316, 843; and 
Aristotle, 190, 229; growth and 
triumph of, 99, 246, 262, 302, 
307, 342-3. 344", and Jews, 328- 
9, 336, 33** 342. 343. 3 8 *, 46%, 
500; and French Revolution, 
792; and immortality, IOQ, 192, 
252, 272-4; and individual, self, - 
or ego, 253, 320, 622, 709; and 
Ireland, 386, 421, 426; and 
Mane, 383, 810; and Moham- 
medans, 306, 440; and Nietzsche, 
788, 792-6, 799; and othrr 
religions, 23. 154, 230, 272, 304, 
328, 499-500; and 1'lato, 121, 

15*. 154, 155. 156, 3<>*-9 3^0, 
328; and Plotinui, 308-9, 317 ,, 
319, 320; popular character of, 
*97, 35-*, 799; nd Roman 
Empire, 80. 241, 293, *98, 304, 
328, 419; and Schopenhauer, 
781-7; and Stoic Um, 280, 282, 
283, 284, 287, 288, 291, 293 

.Christina, Queen of Sweden, 582 

Chrysippui, 280, 281 

Church, 141, 397. 605, 725, 755; 
aiul Aristotle, 121, 182, 475; and 



872* 



INDEX 



Church contd. 
St. Augustine, 324, 375, 380-1, 

34, 385, 514. 545. 767; and 
Charlemagne, 413; and conflict 
of emperor and pope, 492; 
before dark ages, 298, 389, 304, 
400 ;*n chirk ages, 386, 395, 408, 
418; doctors of, 354-71; and 
double truth, 564; and Eastern 
Church, 464, 501 ; and Eastern 
Empire, 382, 4x0, 4x6; and 
feudal aristocracy, 322, 409; and 
Germans, 765; government of, 
349, 428; and Hobbes, 569, 57&, 
577; and Immaculate Concep- 
tion, 489; and Incarnation, 387- 
8; and individual, 253, 365; and 
Inquisition, 548, 556; and Mach- 
iavclii, 527, 53 x ; and Marx, 383; 
in Middle Ages, 305, 322, 326, 
4x5, 428, 43. 511, 62X, 643; in 
modem period, sxx-X3; and 
monasticism, 395; and philo- 
sophy, 326, sxx, 8x3; power of, 
252, 322, 4i5-7, 53i; property 
of, 2x0, 357. 4J, 430, 43'. 452, 
468, 648; in Renaissance, 332, 
5x0, 522, 523, 532; and sacrV 
ments, 482; and salvation, 253, 
384; and science, 512, 548, 585; 
and secular monarchs, 409-' * 
415-16* 577; and Stair, 326, 355, 
359, 382,408, 493, 513, 577, 593, 
*>43. 725, 7&9J States of die, 129, 
41 x; universal, 305; and Vul- 
gate, 342. SVe also bishops; 
conciliar movement; councils of 
the Church; Doctors of the 
Church ; Eastern Church ; Fathers 
iif the Church; papacy; Pope; 
schism ; Western Church 

churches, 42, 709, 7931 national, 
55>, 5**2; Protestant, 545, 7*8 

Cicero, 165, 234, 268, 295, 3 6 2, 
368, 487, 48. 534; and Stoics, 

239 ., 280 

circleU), 23, 233-4, 552, 553, 849 
circulation of the blood, 557, 5 

53, 62 x 
circumcision, 332, 335, 330, 337, 

344 

Cistercian Order, 432 
cities, 22, 285, 453, 454* 4&8, 501, 



cities contd. 

S3'; Greek, 26, 31, 43, 47, 49, 

243 285-6, 451. See also City 

State ; Lombard cities 
Citium, 275 
citizen, 770, 771 

City of God, The (St. Augustine), 
^ 288, 323, 348, 372, 374-83, 515 
Cxty State(s), 31, 241, 294, 295; 

and Aristotle, 183, 207, 216, 813 ; 

eclipse of, 241, 248, 253; and 

HelJenism, 246, 247; and philo- 
sophy, 253, 287, 530, 813; and 

Rousseau, 721, 726 
civil law, 803 

Civil War (American), 662 
Civil War (English), 493, 569, 573, 

625-6, 627, 642, 645, 662, 702 
civil war(s), 663, 702; Roman, 295, 

206, 377 
civilization, 20-42, 243, 285-6, 305, 

419, 448, 661 
Clairvaux, 460 
Clarendon, Earl of (Edward Hyde), 

570 

Clarke, Samuel, 90 
class bias, 94 

class struggle, 43, 578-9, 75'. 816 
class war, 818 
classes, 766 
classification of philosophies, 819- 

20 

Claudius, 282 
Clausewitz, Karl von, 778 
Clazomenae, 81 
Cleanthcs, 238, 277, 280, 282 
Clement V, Pope, 5*3 
Clement VI, Pope, 504-5 % 

Clement VII, Pope, 520 
Clement VII, Antipope, 505 
Clement of Alexandria, 338 
Cleopatra, 241, 294 
clergy* 133* 323, 324. 325. 4*5, 4*8, 

429. 430, 43'. 468, 550 
Clcrmont, Council of, 451 
Clesippus, 96 
Clitomachus (or Hasdrubal), 261, 

262 
clocks, 557; of the Cartesians, 584, 

590, 607, 693-4. See also two 

clocks 
Clouds, The (Aristophanes), 102, 

105 H. 



873 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Clovis, 406, 409 

Cloyne, 674 

Chmy, 431,452,458 

cogito, 586-7. 728 

cognition, 425 n. 

coinage, 27, 121, 254 

Coleridge, S. T., 667, 704, 705, 801 

Colet, John, 534 

collective farming, 659 

Colloqities (Erasmus), 538 

Cologne, 474 

colonies, 26, 139, 249 

colours), 175. 176. 177. 180, 668, 

675. 676. 74L 743 
Columba, St., 406 
Columban, St., 406 
Columbus, Christopher, 282 it., 

487, 509, 537. 845, 849 
comets, 230, 551, 557, 55 s . 560 
Commagene, 250 
commerce, 24, 27, 49, 210-11, 325, 

443,512,621 
Commodus, 284 
common sense, 276, 630, 663, 682, 

842, 852, 860; and Aristotle, 184, 

185, 1 86, 187, 202, 203 
commons, 659 
Commons, House of, 463, 509. 642, 

662, 663 
communism, 131, 211, 508, 539, 

54*. 774 

Communist Manifesto, 81 1 
Communist Tarty, 130, 383, 855 
community, 211. 738, 803, 855; 

and individual! 33-4. 205, 754 
competition, 664, 808, 817 
compromise, 603 
conception, and perception, 177 
conciiiar movement, 492, 505, 519 
concubinage, 430 
conditioned reflex, 802, 861 
Condorcet, 285, 749~5<>, 75 . 804 
Confession of Faith of a Smwyard 

Vicar, The (Rousseau), 536, 7 1 6, j 

77-*o, 73 
Confeisums (St. Au{rutine). 364-71, 

372-4, 384 

Confessions (Rousseau), 711 
Confucius, 31, 305, 419, 843 
congenital difference*, 753 
Congress, 577, 664 
conic sections, 234. 240 
conjunction, and causation, 691-4 



Conrad, son of Emperor Henry 

IV, 451 

conscience, 109, 719 

consciousness, 840 

consensus gentium, 281 

consequences, as test of beliefs, 853 

consequent, in logic, 690 ' 

conservation: of energy, 561; of 
momentum, 583 

conservatism, 66 1 

consistency and credibility, 637 

Consolation of Philosophy (Boe- 
thius), 389-92 

Constance, Council of, 506, 509 

Constance of Sicily, 463, 465 

Constantine the Great, 298, 308, 
35 i-* 356; conversion of, 304, 
323. 349. 35 . 35*- See .also 
Donation of Constantine 

Constantinople, 298, 360, 410, 412; 
and Arianism, 353; and Christ- 
ian philosophy, 501 ; conquered 
by Turks, 299, 440, 509. 57; 
and Crusades, 456, 464, 517; and 
Greek classics, 461 ; and Gregory 
the Great, 401, 405; and Mo- 
hammedans, 440 ; and Nestorian- 
ism, 387, 388; and papacy, 408, 
501 ; patriarchs of, 408, 410, 415, 
416 

Constantius II, 356 

constitution^), 127. 129, 530; 
American, 623, 629, 655, 657, 
664; British, 629, 642, 662, 663; t 
French, 629, 664; of Holy 
Roman Empire. 408; Roman, 
295; of Sparta, 116-17. 124 

constitutional government, 403 

contemplation, 52, 53, 104, 203, 
204, 317, 838. 840 

contempt. 58, 60 

Continental philosophy, 568, 586, 
668 

continuity, 857, H6i 

Contra Crltunt. See Auuintt Celsut 

contra Jut ion, law of, 615 

convention, and romanticism, 702, 
709 

co-ordinate geometry, 55, 558, 

**** 

Copemican hypothetic 239, 282, 

548; in antiquity, 236-8, 245; 
and human pride, 550 



INDEX 



Copernicus, Nikolaus, 230, 498, 
509 512, 547-50, 566, 723; and 
Aristarchus of Samoa, 153, 238; 
disposes of man's cosmic im- 
portance 816; and Galileo, 555, 
556; and Kepler, 551, 552; and 
Newtn, 89, 557, 561 

Cordova, 343. 446, 448 

Corinth, 3 1 ; league of, 248 

Cornford, F. M., 40, 50, 51, 60, fti, 
165 n. 

Corporate State, 725 

corporation lawyers, 95 

Corsair, Byron's, 777-8 

Cortes, 577 

Cos, 250 

cosmic impiety, 856 

cosmic justice, 45, 63, 160 

cosmic strife, 46 

cosmogony: of Descartes, 585; of 
Plato, 125, 165-9 

cosmological argument, 608, 609- 
11,721,736 

cosmology, in ancient philosophy, 
74-5, 82, 88, 91 

cosmopolitan point of view, 243 

Cotes, Roger, 585 

councils of the Church, 423, 436, 
491,492,493, 506 

Counter- Reformation, 513, 520, 
544-6, 855 

Couturat, Louis, 610, 614 

L'owper, William, 674 

creation, 30, 165-6, 170, 317-18, 
425-7, 616-18; and St. Augus- 
tine, 372, 373. 376; and Jews, 46, 
152, 328; and theology, 46, 318 

creative evolution, 821 

Creator, 86, 87, 156 

Crecy, 776 

credibility and consistency, 637 

credulity, 696, 729 

Crete, 24-6, 35, 121, 261 

Crimean War, 658 

criminal law, 803 

Critias, 101, 103 

critique of knowledge, 730 

Critique of Practical Reason, The 
(Kant), 735. 736 ^ 

Cntvjut of Pure Reason, The 
(Kant), 618, 667, 698, 732-6? 

739-43. 73 
Cn/o (Plato), 154 



Croesus 43 

Cromwell, Oliver, 545, 569, 575, 
625-8, 642, 654, 659 

Croton, 49 

Crucifixion, 154 

cruelty, 157, 278, 385, 670, 769, 
794. 861 

Crusades, 343, 450, 451, 455-6. 
466, 468; and Albigenses, 464, 
468, 470; first, 451, 455, 460; 
second, 460; third, 454, 455: 
fourth, 464, 517 

culture: and Athens, 77-80, 100; 
in Carolingian period, 414-15; 
in later antiquity, 217; Mo- 
hammedan, 440-9; and Roman 
Empire, 294-307 

Cumont, 302 n. t 377 n., 499 n. 

cycle of fire, 277 

Cymbeline, 544 

Cynics, -ism, in. 253-6, 275, 276, 
300, 622 

Cyprian, St., 204 

Cyril of Alexandria, St., 387-8, 392 

Cyrus, 31,43. 330, 525 

d'Ailly, 495 n. 

daimon, 75, 109, 277, 288 

Damascus, 442 

Damasus 1 (St.), Pope, 356, 360, 

361 
Damian, St. Peter, 430, 432, 434, 

437 
damnation, 338, 37. 3?i, 3?4. 3^5, 

560, 594; of unbaptized infants, 

384, 3&5 

Danes, 326, 415, 419, 
Daniel, 337 

Dante, 192, 230, 309, 390, 455. 492, 

527 

Damon, 703 
Danube, 294, 33 
Danzig, 781 

Daphnae, 43 

Darius I, 31, 47, 4? 77. 244 
dark ages, 80, 325-6, 354, 385, 4x8. 

448 ; papacy in, 408-20 
Darwin, Charles, 635, 649, 667, 

704, 752-3. 807-8 
Darwin, Erasmus, 752 
David, 329. 359. 575 
David of Dinant, 477 
day, 23 



875 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



De Amtna (Aristotle), 192, 444, 475 

De Caelo (Aristotle), 153, 235 n. 

De Emendation* (Aristotle), 439 

De rEsprit (Helvttius), 748 

De Monarchic (Dante), 492 

De Principiis (Origen), 346 

De Tribus Impostoribus, 465 

death penalty, 803 

Decalogue, 328 

Decamnichus, 207 

Declaration of Independence, 55, 
650 n. 

"Declaration des droits de 1'hom- 
mc," 803 

Decline and Fall of tfte Roman 
Empire, see Gibbon 

deduction, 823, 857 ; and Aristotle's 
logic, 2x9-23 ;and Francis Bacon, 
564, 567; in Continental philo- 
sophy! 668 ; in geometry, 44. 234 ; 
Greek, 21 ., 57-8, 79. 257, 292 ; 
in mathematics, 48, 858 

Delos, 248 

Delphi, 6 1, 1 06 

Democedes of Croton, 49 

democracy, 135, 217, 540, 569, 593, 
764; and Aristotle, 211-12, 213; 
Athenian, 79t 94-5. 101. 103, 
1 08, 125, 216; and Bentham, 750, 
805 ; and churches, 492, 793 ; and 
ethics, 738, 706, 807 ; Greek, 27, 
72, 92, 213 ; and James, 839 ; and 
Kant, 667, 73 1 , 738 ; and liberal- 
ism, 621, 631; and Ix>ckc, 654; 
in Middle A#es, 325, 467, 493, 
502,509, 5 17; modem, 200, 511, 
646, 756 ; reasons for, ! 28, 798-9 ; 

- in Rome, 295, 296, 504; and 
Rousseau, 713. 716, 721, 726-7; 
and Sparta, 117/1., 120 

Democritus, 84-6, 90, 91-3, 97, 
227, 232, 277, 565, 789; and 
Am tot k, 182, 229; and Bpi- 
curuft, 164, 266, 269 ; and science, 
55&. 857; ani space, 90, 561 
demon(s), demonology, 338, 377 
Descartes, Rene*, 56, 292, 494. $69, 
58o-9. 593. 600. 623, 7*; 
cogtto of, 374, 586-7; and to- 
oatinate geometry, 55, 558, 583; 
determinism of, 590; and God, 

43^. 5*9. 593. 6*. fcoK* 69. 6*9. 

718, 814, 863; influence of, 568. 



Descartes, Rene* contd. 

5*0, 589, 593, 618, 666. 667, 813 ; 
and Jesuits, 546, 580, 581 ; and 
Locke, 628, 633, 669; method of 
(Cartesian doubt), 585, 589; and 
science, 547, 583. 5&. 59* ; and 
space, 90; and subjectivism, 513, 
586, 728, 730; and substance, 
594, 606, 614; and theory of 
knowledge, 586-8, 589, 634 

descriptions, theory of, 859 

Dcsiderius, bishop of V'iennc, 404 

design, 73 6 

desire, 806-7, 819 

Destiny, 29, 279 

determinism, 319, 571, 572, 616; 
and atomisU, 86; and Ikrgson, 
821 , 827 ; and Cartesian ism .JSQO ; 
in psychology, 802 ; and Spinoza, 
593. 594. 597 ; a d Stoicism, 276, 
280. 289-90 

Deutero- Isaiah, 332-3 

Devonshire. 2nd Karl of (Xx>rd 
Hard wick), 569 

Dewey, John. 787, 844, &47 56 

I>c Witts, the, 592 

Diabolic Vision. 780 

dialectic method. 111-13, '4 iX . 439. 
45^. 45^. 75-*x> 702, 815. hid, 



. 
dhlecUcal 



3^3, 



, 



Diana of the i:phctan*, 2\ 
dictator. -&hip&, 52, 217, 646, 727 
Dietrich von licrn (Thi-odum ) 

3 s6 

differential ctjuaiiorm, o' 
(JuKtuiun I , V; > 

51 

l)\<> C'a^iiu*. 283 
biockuan, 298, 30^, 3X6 
Diodoru* Sicului, 49, 250 
I)i<H?cneH, 254-5, 37<j 
l)ioj?vritfc LacrtiuA, 85, 263, 266, 

27*), 292 , 
iJiognetus, 288 

I) ton vtm* tlte Areopagitr, 424-7 
Dionysius tlie Younger, t \runt of 

Syracuse, 126, 144 
Dionysodorus, </> 
^Dtonytus, 32-41, 50, 62 
Dittwn df la Mttlfsde (Descartes), 



876 



INDEX 



Discourse on Inequality (Rousseau), 

7I4-I5 

Discourses (Epictetus), 264 n. 
Discourses (MachiaveIJi), 526, 527- 

.9.789 

disjunction, 281 
Dispersion, >34 1 
distance, 90 
distribution, 813 
divination, 23, 279 

Divine Comedy (Dante), 492. AW 

also Paradiso 

Divine Intellect or Mind. 313, 314 
divine right: of kings, 621, 627, 

642-7. 653-4, 716, 726; of 

majorities, 657 
division of powers, 724 
divorces, 415. 45 
Docetics, 345 

Doctors of the Church, 354-71 
dogma(s), -tism, 41 57. 266, 512, 

630-1, 863 

Dominic, St., 470, 472-3 
Dominican Order, 470, 472-3, 474. 

486, 504 

Dornitian, Emperor, 283. 284 
Don Juan ( Uyron j, 779 
Donation of Constantino, 410-11. 

450, 5**, 509. 5*9 
Donatiftt horesv, 371 
Dorian lurmonies, 131 
ftonans 25, 20, 114, itS 
Dostoevsky, F. M., 703. 795 
double truth, 475, s<>4 
doubt, 257, 309. 5' S 5~6. 5^9 
drama, 131 
dreainU), 172, 823 
drugs, 290 
Dryden, John, 628 
dualism, 156, 241. 252, 323. 469. 

500, 590, 820 
Duns Scotus, John, 473. 486, 489- 

90, 491.495 

duration, 823-4, 826, 832, 834-5 
duty, 707. 737-8, 768 
dynamic pleasures, 267 
dynamics, 553, 557 

618 

Earty Greek Philosophy (Hurnet), 
41,44*., 51 *.. 52 . ' 

earth, 13, 62 ; and centre of uni- 
verse, 229, 235, 280, 559; as 



earth contd. 

element, 46, 59, 62, 63, 74, 166, 
167, 229, 230, 277; in Greek 
astronomy, 47, 153, 165-8, 229, 
2 35-9; motions of, 229, 235-7, 
547-50, 556, 562, 585; and 
Newton, 55^-7, 55^-9 

East, 241, 274, 407 ; and Greece, 41, 
72, 307, 342; and Rome, 294, 
301, 303-4, 342. See also Eastern 
Empire ; Far East 

East India Company, 621, 804 

Easter, 406, 414, 500 

Eastern Church, 349, 384, 402, 404, 
410, 416, 430, 464, 521 

Eastern Empire, 299, 386, 424, 464, 
517; and Arabs, 306, 326, 440; 
and Church, 382, 408; fall of, 
440; heresies in, 353, 388; and 
papacy, 304, 401, 405, 410, 416; 
and Rome, 412, 417-18. See also 
Byzantine Umpire ; Constanti- 
nople 

Ebert, Friedrich, 817 

Ecclesiasticus, 333-4 

F.cgbert, archbishop of York, 414 

Kckhard, Johannes, 784 

eclipses, 21, 24, 44, 73. 82, 235, 
236, 250 

economics, 285, 443, 646, 746, 750- 
* 753* 808, &9 $ IO > 8n, 848; 
and intellectual goods, 160; and 
Ix>cke, 660-1, 664-5; and war, 
741 

ecstasy, 41. 55. 3"4 

Eddington, Sir Arthur, 269 n., 682 

Kddy, Mrs., 49 

Edessa, 444 

I Edilbcrt, 406 
| Edinburgh, 685 

education, 94. 3&6 4*8, 546, 753; 
und Aristotle, 213, 216; in 
modem times, 217, 621, 664, 
714, 716, 749, 750, 755.&H, **47; 
and Plato, 126, ft9, 130-1, 133- 
4, 144, 152; in Sparta, 115, 119, 
122-3 

Edward 1, 502 

Edward III, 492, 494 

Edward JV, 509, 577. 645 

Edward VIII, 415 

ego, -ism, 680, 688, 710, 745. &>7> 
824 



1877 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



pt, iao, 334, 348, 353, 604; and 
Alexander, 241, 242, 244* 246, 
302 ; and Aristotle, 207, 2 14 ; and 
astronomy, 235; civilization of, 
21, 22, 24; and Crete, 24-5. 35 J 
and. geometry, 44, 54, 231; 
government of, 27, 136, 644, 798 ; 
Greek philosophers in, 44, 49, 
84, 231, 311; and Greek world, 
35. 43. 47, 48, 49, m. 231, 246, 
247, 302; Jews in, 331; and 
Mohammedans, 306, 440; mon- 
asticism in, 395-6; Monophy- 
sites in, 389, 440 ; priests in, 428, 
499; religion of, 22, 23; and 
Rome, 241, 294; writing in, 22, 
27-8. See also Alexandria 

Einstein, Albert, 49, 90. 239, 561, 
860,862 

Elagabalus. Ste Heliogsbalus 

EIea,67 

EJeatic school, 833 

elect, election, 328, 376, 381, 383, 
3^4, 482 

electrons, 66 

elements, 46. 47. <>2, 74, 76, 82, 
1 66, 167, 1 68, 169, 170, 229, 230, 
276. See also air; earth; tire; 
water 

Eleusinian mysteries, 29, 38, 40 

Eleusis, 38 

Elias, Brother, 472 

Eli*, 256 

Elisha, 592 

elixir of life, 62 

Elizabeth, Princess, 582 

Elizabeth, Queen, 252, 539. 545> 6 43 

t'lipses, 234. 55. 552, 561 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 705 

Emeu, 303 

EmiU (Rousseau), 716, 718, 731 

Empedocle*, 62, 72-6. 81, 82, 85, 
87, 135, 228, 326 

Empero^ 356, 388, 389, 502, 530; 
conflict of odpc and, 325, 4o~9 
41$, 416, 428, 432-6, 450, 463-7. 
491-2; interdependence of pope 
and, 323, 412-13, 492. See aJto 
Eastern Empire; Holy Roman 
Empire; papacy; pope; Roman 
Empire ; Western Empire 

empirical knowledge, 53. 157, 161- 

2. 171,281,733,744,860 

8 



empiricism, empirical philosophy, 
158, 180, 568, 618, 635, 693, 758. 
819, 857 ; and Berkeley, 678, 679, 
685; and Greeks, 39, 45; and 
James, 840-2; and Hume, 685; 
and Kant, 667, 740, 741, 744; 
and Locke, 628, 633-14; and 
logic, 89, 679, 860; British, 586, 
698, 728-30, 748, 812, 814; 
tnodem, 862; and science, 
112-13, 699, 743. 857; social, 
817 

Enchiridion miVito Christian* (Eras- 
mus), 537 

encyclopaedists, 623 

end and means, 201-2, 526, 530-1, 
770-1 

endogamy, 708 

endurance, 285 

Endymion, 303 

Engels, Friedrich, 754. #10. 817 

England, 130, 252, 274 386, 423, 
457, 5a, 545. 5 6 9J aristocracy 
in, 79, 646 ; during barbarian in* 
vasions, 421-2; checks and bal- 
ances in, 661-4; and Church. 

4*5. 45* . 545; ci** ""** ">> 
751; conversion of, 413-14; 
criminal law of, 803; in dark 
ages, 326, 414; and Descartei, 
581 ; and divine right, 644-5 ; m 
eighteenth century, 121. 30!; 
and French revolutionary philo- 
sopher*, 750; and freedom, 660: 
French wars with, 503; gentle 
man in, 130; and Inquisition, 470; 
Irish miftftjonarieft m. 406; Jew* 
'" 455; landholdtng in. 658-9; 
and liberalism, 121, 620, 621-3; 
and Mane, 810, 817; Methodism 
in, 40, 272; monarchy in. 325, 
4t3. 577, 645 ; Normans in. 4*K; 
and papacy, 464, 402, 501, 505. 
508, 509; political philosophy in, 
629; and prudence. 703; public 
schools 01, 1141.; rationalistic 
revolt in, 746; Reformation m, 
4 5; and Renaissance, 533, 544; 
and revolution, 628 ; and roman- 
ticism, 703 ; and Rome, 294, 4 3* 
* 14, 419; in seventeenth crntury. 
579. S*. 593. 625. 645, 703: 
Victorian age in. 95 ; uniwrsitiet 

8l 



INDEX 



England contd. 

in, 461; and wealth in four- 

teenth century, 502 
England, Bank of, 621, 627 
England, Church of, 539, 625, 645 
Enneads (Plotinus), 311-20, 443 
em realMmdm, 736 
cntekchy, 590 
enthusiasm, 34, 37. 184, 729 
environment, 820, 852, 854, 855^6 
envy, 157 
Ephesians, 23, 60 
Ephesua, 23, 59, 173. 388, 396, 4<H 
Epictetus, 264 ., 276, 277, 282, 

283, 284, 285, 286-8, 290, 300 
Epicureanism, 192, 241, 253, 263- 

74, 275. 299. 300, 3", 320, 390, 

55& 

Epicurus, 84, 86, 263-74, 278, 411, 
789; and utilitarians, 803, 804 

epicycles, 552 

Enimenidcs, 346 

episcopate, 415-17. See aUo bishops 

cpistemoloiry. 729, 739, 743. 788. 
See also theory of knowledge 

equality. 160, 16 1 ; of nun, in 
ancient philosophy, 136, 196, 
2ii. 213, 293; of man, in modern 
philosophy, 205, 572, 621, 722, 
753> 75<>. 793. 803; of women, 



-conUL 



Erasmus, 533-8, 544 
Eranianisrn, 382 
^KrastuH. 6V/ Ltiber 
hratosthcnes, 239. 246 
Erigena, Johannes Scotus. See 

John the Scot 
Erinyes, 63 
Krc*. 37 
error(s), 849 ; in Aristotle, 184, 220- 

i, 223-5; n Pbtonic theory of 

ideas, 148 
eschatology, 382-3 
Kssaii pMosophiqutt (Descartes), 



Essay Contenting Human Under* 

standing (Locke), 628, 630 # 
Essay on Man (Pope), 390 
Rtsay on Mtraclts (Hume), 685 
Essays on Government (Locke), 657 
Essence, 148, 166, 167, 168, 317. 
425, 488, 489. 609, 635; nd 
Aquinas, 476, 477, 47$. 4 8 ; 



and Aristotle, 188-9, 191. 192, 
223-5 

essences, 158, 160, 162 

Essenes, 334 n. 

Essex, Robert Devereux, Earl of, 
563 

Este family, 605 

Esthonia, 659 

eternity, 56, 65, 166, 316, 786, 848 

ethic(s), 99, 136, 137-8, 326, 756, 
805-6, 863 ; and Aquinas, 480-2 ; 
aristocratic, 796; and Aristotle, 
*53. 195-206, 216; and Bentham, 
805; Christian, in, 320; con- 
templative ideal in, 53; and 
differences between Continental 
and Bridsh philosophy, 669-70; 
and Epicurus, 268 ; and good of 
community, 738; Greek, 52-3, 
6 1, 82, 92, in, 320; in Hellen- 
istic world, 250; and Helvetjus, 
749; and James, 842-3; Jewish, 
339-40; and Kant, 291, 736-8; 
and Locke, 637-41, 651; and 
Marx, 816; and More, 542; and 
Nietzsche, 61, 789-9*. 795-7, 
799-800; "noble,** 670; and 
Plato, 126, 154, 377; romantic, 
708; and Rousseau, 71 3 ./f.; and 
Schopenhauer, 783-5, 788; and 
Socrates, 93, in, 126; and 
Spinoza, 592, 593^-; and Stoic- 
ism, 275, 281, 289-92; and 
utilitarians, 730, 807 

Ethics (Spinoza), S9 2 ff-> 605 

Etna, 72 

Eton, 245 n. 

Euclid, 55, 169, 232, 233-4, 246, 
257. 269, 460, 487. 595, 639. 740, 

743 

Eudoxus, 232-3 
Eugene, Prince, 606 
Eugenius IV, Pope,^o6, 567, 519 
Eugenius, usurper in Roman Em- 

pire. 357 
eunuchs, 347 
Euripides, 33, 36, 37, 38, 77, 81 

loo, 107, 207, 568 
Eustochium, 361-2 



Evagrius, 393 

Evans, Sir Arthur, 24, 25 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Eve, 344, 379, 384, 578 

events, 860, 86 1 

evidence, 161, 489 

evil, 154, 169, 262, 315, 319, 369, 
370, 426, 597 ; and Aquinas, 479. 
480, 481 ; and Boethiu*, 390 ; and 
Gnosticism, 315; and Leibniz, 
612, 613; and Persian dualism, 
500; Zproastrian and Mani- 
chsean view of, 345 

evolution, 649, 752-4 ; and Bergson, 
820-1; and Dewey, 848; in 
Godhead, 64; in Greek philo- 
sophy, 46, 73. 189. 191 ; of ideas, 
667 ; and Locke 657 ; and politics, 
532 

excess, 39 

exclusiveness, 331 

executive, 655, 661-4, 724, 726 

exhaustion, 233 

existence, 814, 859; and Aquinas, 
476-7, 484; and Kant, 734, 735 '. 
and Leibniz, 609. 617; and 
Locke, 728; and Plato, 176-7; 
and Socrates, 157; struggle for, 
75*. 753, 808 

experience, 161, 633-4, 678, 698, 
600-700, 732. 733. 740, 74', &4- 
2,860 

experiment, 158, 488, 853 

extension, 594 

extinction, 784 

"Eye of Bel," 250 

Ezekiel, 330, 331 

Ezra, 330, 331, 341 

Ezzelino da Romano, 778 
* 

fact(s), 113, 138, 176,549.601,733, 

853, 856 

faith and works, 546 
falling bodies, 549, 553*4, 55 
False Decretals, 411 
family, 132-3, 197, 208, 211 
Far Ease, 243. 546 
Farfa, 43* * 
Faaci&m, 75^ 798, 813, 818 
fate, JM, 134, 250, 377, 55 
.Fathcf f God the, 352, 425, 457 
Fathers of the Church. 154, 283, { 

922, 328^., 346, 426, 474 j 

Faustina, 284 1 

Fauatua, 368-9 1 

3*7 I 



feeling, 819, 863 

feminism, 33, 37 

Ferdinand II, of Spain, 520, 577 

Ferrara, Council of, 501, 507, 

521 

fertility cults, 23, 29, 32 
"Fete de 1'Etre Supreme-" 718 
feudal aristocracy, 322, 324. 409, 

509. 577 
feudalism, 324, 327, 35611., 418, 

430,436,450.454. 54. 816 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas, 812 n. 
few, the, 205, 756, 790 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 512, 624, 

730, 744-5. 778, 782, 73. 856; 

influence of, 667, 730. 748, 801, 

818; and subjectivism 514. 73O, 

744-5 

Fielding, Henry, 704 
Fifth Monarchy Men, 382 
Kilmer, bir Robert, 642-7, 653 
filial cause, 86 
Firdousi, 444 
fire, 47. 82, 88, 91. 167-^, "9, 230, 

276, 277, 279 ; as element, 46, 62. 

74; and Herecliius, 61-4, 66, 

276; and Pythagoras, 236, 237; 

scientific conception of, 67 
First Cause, 190, 477, 609, 6to 
Fine World War. 817, 848 
fittest, survival of the, 73. 228, 7|2, 

753. 808 
fit* Stage! of Gtftk /?r/fi<m 

(Murray), 30 ., 25011., 1S4 it^ 

264 n. 

Flanders, 502, 503 
flesh and spirit, 323 
Florence. 505, 516, 517, 518, 525, 

797 

Florentine Academy, 521 

Hux, 59. 62, 63-5, 173^4. &> * 
ativ change 

force, 239, 556-7, 560-1; centri- 
fugal, 73 ; Locke on use of, 663 

Ford cars, 660 

form(s), 489; and Arototk, 185, 
187-9, 192, 193. ***, 3*7. 47; 
in Platook theory of idea*, 143 

fortune, 247, 250 

Foucsuh, J. B L., 562 

Foulque*, Guy de, 486 

Fountains Abbey, 432 

France, 252, 301, 386, 463, 627. 



88* 



INDEX 



France contd. 

701, 730, 779; and Albigenses, 
464, 468, 470; and Arabs, 326; 
British empiricist philosophy in, 
748 ; and Byron, 779 ; and checks 
and balances, 664; and Chris- 
tianity* 4ib; and Church, 451, 
462; feudal disorders in, 417; 
and Germany, 747, 765, 779; 
and Inquisition, 470; and Itafy, 
516, 520, 528; landholding in, 
658; and liberalism, 121, 623-4; 
and I-ocke, 624, 629, 666; and 
Marx, 810, 81 1 ; and monarchy, 
325. 43. 576, 577; and Nor- 
mans, 415, 419, 428; and papacy, 
3*5. 492. 501, 502-3, 505, 506, 
50$; and Pelagian heresy, 384; 
and prudence, 702-3; and Re- 
naissance, 520, 533; and roman- 
ticism, 705 ; and Home, 294, 305 ; 
and Rousseau, 703, 712-13, 716, 
720, 721, 727; and Sicily and 
Naples, 520; in sixth century, 
401; and State, 578; in tenth 
century, 417; Visigoths and 
Franks in, 386; and wars with 
England, 494 

Francis I, Emperor, Ho 3 

Francis I of France, 520 

I'^ancis of A**isi, St., 51, 463, 466, 
470-2. 473, 502 

Franciscan Order, 447. 470-3, 504 
^Franciscan schoolmen, 486-98 

rrankewUtn (Mary Shelley), 705-7 

Franklin, Benjamin, 55 ., 271 

Franks, 353, 386, 394> 403. 404. 
406,408, 409, 412 

Frederick 1 (Barbaras^), 452, 453. 
454. 463. 747, 765 

Frederick II, Emperor, 448, 463, 
464-8, 516, 520 

Frederick II of Prussia, 7*7. 747. 

74*, 765 
free press, 764 
free will, 269, 318, 319, 34$, 54$, 

571. 572, 590; and St. Augustine, 
J-4; nd Bcrgson, 821, 



freedom, 92 n. t 121, 296, 581, 593, 
666, 723, 776, 827, 828; and 
Hegel, 723, 763-4, 767, 768; and 
Kant, 731, 735, 736; and Stoics, 

278, 293 

Freedom and Organization (Russell), 
801 n. 

Frege, 858 

French Revolution, 577, 658, 664, 
6 7i, 703, 706, 779, 798,803 ;Con- 
clorcet on principles- of, 750; and 
democracy, 217, 511 ; and Kant, 
731; and liberalism, 621, 623; 
and Nietzsche, 790, 793; and 
philosophy, 665, 667, 74*. 748-9, 
792; and rights of man, 804; 
and Rousseau, 727 

friendship, 202, 206, 264, 268, 278, 
390 

Frisia. 414 

From Religion to Philosophy (Corn- 
ford), 40, 51, 60 

From 7Vw/u to Plato (Burnet), 
85 n., 102, 105 

Fulbert, 458 

Fulda, 414 

future life, 350, 736 

Galatians, 247, 249; Epistle to the, 
361, 380/1, 

Galen, 445 . 448, 537 

Galileo, 112, 226, 547, 549, 553-7, 
752 ; and Aristotle, 226, 230; and 
Copemican theory, 512; and 
Descartes, 581; and Hobbes, 
568, 569, 571 ; and Newton, 230; 
and projectiles, 2/0, 234; and 
religious prejudices, 238, 368* 
548, 623, 723 ; and science, 226, 
547, 562; and truth, 139; and 
war, 5x2 

Gall, St., 414 

Gallienus, 311 

Gama, Vasco da, 509, 517* 

Gandhi, 365 n. 

Gandia, Duke of, 519 

Garden of Eden, 530 

Garigliano, 417 

gases, 86 



827; and Utbni*, 607, 612; and .... , v , 

Luther, 538; and scholastics, Cr.issendi, Pierre, 374, 605 

35. 423, 4a6, 489; nd Spinoza. *} Gaul, 49, '39, 3O5,j|6o ; 394, 390, 

594 ; and Stoics. 289-90 ' "" 

frte voUtions, 735 s 

881 



404, 422; invasions of, 386, 387, 
421 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Gauls, 249, 377 

Geiger, George Raymond, 854 

general and particular concepts, 830 

general law, 737 

general will, 722, 723, 724, 7*5* 764 

Generis, 338, 372, 4*6, 487, 5^5. 644 

Geneva, 645, 711, 715, 716, 720 
721 

Genoa, 454. 465, 5*6 

Genseric, 778 

gentiles, 332, 333, 338, 339, 340, 
341, 344 

gentleman, 52-3, 130, 216-17, 839 

genus, 496 

geography, 158, 487, 732 

geology, 74 

geometry, 689, 714, 743. 857; and 
astronomy, 239; and Bergson, 
821, 823; and Descartes, 580, 
583, 586; and Greeks, 21 ., 44, 
54-5. 57-8, 112, 161, 231-5, 315 ; 
and Hobbes, 570, 571 ; and 
Kant, 733, 734, 74<>. 743; *nd 
Leibniz, 615; non-Euclidean, 
75 9*. and Pb to, 55, 126, 146, 152, I 
*53 169. See also co-ordinate 
geometry ; Euclid 
George I, 605 
George III, 717 
Gcrbert. See Sylvester II, Pope 
German philosophy, 202, 618, 667, 
698,744-5.746-7,748,757.801; 
idealist, 629, 707, 73<>. 746 
German invasions, 298, 209, 30$, 

355, 3&6, 394. 4*2 
Germanic kingdoms, 386 
Germany, 1^7, 252, 523, 604 646, 

* 776, 810; Anabaptists in, 545; 
and Charlemagne, 408, 412,413; 
and Church, 322, 54$ ; conflict* 
with papacy, 464, 492 ; converted, 
414; dictatorship in, 727; feudal 
principles in, 450; and Hegel, 
746-8? 764. #5, 766 ; and Humr, 
730; international position of, 
747; intellectual predominance 
?f. 746-7; investiture struggle : 

' in, 436-7; tnd Italy, 45*. 465; j 
Jews in, 455; king of, as em- 
ptror, 494; Itndholdtng in, 658; ! 
MachiavelU on, 529; and Man, f 
811, 817; and Midintao), 304; { 

* and Napoleon, 747, 778; and 1 

882* 



flat 



Germany- 
nationalism, 745, 747, 748; new 
society created in, 532; and 
Plutarch, 121 ; power of govern- 
ment in, 577 ; and prudence, 702 ; 
and Nietzsche, 791 ; and Re- 
formation, 544; and Renaissance, 
533; and romanticism, 121, 704, 
752, 801; and Rome, 305; and 
Sicily, 465. See also Holy Roman 
Empire ; Prussia 

Gerson, Jean de, 495 . 55. 534 

Geulincx, Arnold, 583-4, 590 

Ghibellines, 465, 472, 492, 501, 
5. 765,776, 778 

Gibbon, Edward, 284, 303 w., 
311 ., 349 a., 351, 388, 390, 393. 
397 . 

Gilbert, William, 557. 566 

Gilbert de la Porrec, 460 

Girondins, 623 

gladiators, 285 

globe, 166 

Gnosticism, 151, 2$2. 315, 316, 
3K. 344. 345. 469, 500 

goat, 32 

God, 59, 60. 345, 434. 542, 564, 
720, 795; and St. Ambrose, 356. 
357, 35H;and St, Anselm. 437-8; 
and Aquinas, 447, 476 Ho, 482, 
484; arguments for and profit 
of, 56, 476, 608-12, 633, 669, 
813, 863; and Aristotle, 180-92. 
104, 202-3, 214, 3*. 4/6, 47T** 
478, 761 ; and St. Augustine. 368, 
370, 3*4 ; and Averrtx-*, 447 ; and 
Brntham, 638, 804; and Ber- 
keley, 513, 669, 673, 729; and 
Bucthsuft, 300, 391 ; and Caesar, 
326; and l>eainr, 584. 586, 
589, 606, 669 ; and HOCK! and bud, 
138, 792-3; and Kovrmnent, 
575. 643. 653; ami llrgrl. 761; 
and Htraclitut, 60, 63 ; and 
James, 839, 845, 846; and Jews, 
165, 3*. 33*. 365. 44; and 
John the Scot, 425-6, 478; and 
Kant, 670, 736; and i^ibnu, 
606-13, 614, 615, 616-17, 618; 
and Locke, 630, 633, 639*40, 
728; and man, 754. 776, 79-3 
855; and myaticft, 373, 707, 
785; and Nrwton, 559, 560, 



INDEX 



Godcontd. 

585; and Nietzsche, 777, 
792-3, 798; of Old and New 
Testaments, 469, 608; and Ori- 
gen, 346-8 ; and Orphism, 37, 39, 
52; and Parmenides, 67, 150; 
and permanence, 64; and Plato, 

130, 133. 52, 1*5-70, 313, 377, 
863 ; and Platonic ideas, 143, 146, 
149, 151, 1 52; and Plotinus, 312* 
313; and Pythagoras, 51,56; and 
Reformation, 545 ; and Rousseau, 
717-20; and Sceptics, 262; and 
Schopenhauer, 783, 785, 786; 
and science, 559-60; and Soc- 
rates, too, 107, 108, loo, 155; 
and soul, 366, 545 ; and Spinoza, 
144.^92, 595-6oo, 606, 769; and 
Stoics, 276, 277, 279, 280, 281, 
286-00, 314; thoughts of, 55, 
848 ; and Voltaire, 715 ; and \Vy- 
clirlc, 507. See also Creator; 
One ; pantheism ; Trinity 

gcxi(s): and Alexander, 242; in 
Bacchic ritual, 34; and Empe- 
doclcs, 72, 75, 76; and Epicurus, 
i6<>, 270 ; and Greeks, 37, 44, 46, 
5*>. 61, 97, 227, 236, 319; and 
Homer, 29, 130; and Jews, 330- 
it 338; and Plato, 130, 133, 165- 
?o ; of Home, 301 ; and Socrates, 
105, 107, 163, 164; and Stoics, 
277, 279. See alto Olympian gods 

Goethe, 252, 599. 747. 778 

XTbg and Magog, 381 

gold, 62, 132, 133, 306 

golden age, 74, 75. 284 

golden mean, 183, 196, 204, 212 

good, -ness, 63, 156, 199, 201, 496, 
714, 738, 700; and Aristotle, 195. 
200, 201, 203; and cynics, 255; 
M*riichjeiun view of, 345; in 
Persian dualism, 499; *"<* Plttl0 ' 
126, 138-9, 146, 151-3; and 
Plotinus, 308, 312; standards of, 

.,5*. 138 
Cordian 111, 311 
Gorgias, 98, 256 
f'Orfjai (Plato), 99 
CiospcU, 309, 339, 340, 348, 7*4- 

Set alto Synoptic Gospels 
Gotha, 360, 363; conversion of, 

405 ; invasions of, 389. 4*9. 42' *> 



Goths contcL 
and Rome, 353, 375, 377, 386-7, 

^ 39 * 

Gottingen, 705, 782 

Gottschalk, 423 

government, 23, 211-12, 302, 349, 
653. 738, 764, 805. See also 
politics; State 

Gracchi, the, 295, 361 

grammar, 281 

Gratian, 355, 356 

gravitation, 230, 239, 585, 621, 666 

Great Britain, 757, 801 

Great Fire, 570 

great man, 777, 789, 799 

Great Mother, 23, 25 n. t 36, 350 

Great Schism, 325, 493, 505-6, 5<>8 

"greatest happiness of the greatest 
number," 750, 796, 801, 802 

Greece, Greekfs), i2c, 210, 215, 
782 ; and Alexander, 242 ff. t 304 ; 
and Arabs, 299, 443-4 ; and Asia 
Minor, 23, 77, 119, 246; astro- 
nomy in, 227, 229, 231-40, 548; 
attitudes of, toward the world, 
170, 329, 855; and barbarians, 
242-3, 275, 363 ; cities of, 47, 72, 
78, 79, 121, 241, 243, 246, 247, 
249, 295 ; civilization and culture 
of, 21-42, 77-8o, 117, 121, 216- 
17. 243, 299, 305. 334, 346; 
colonists of, 23, 248, 249 ; decline 
of, 296; and democracy, 72, 212; 
and Egypt, 35, 43. 235; and 
ethics, in, 200-1; genius of, 
theoretical, 231^.; and Jews, 
246, 334, 342, 344;** Hellen- 
ism, 241, 247, 248, 250, 275 ; and % 
logic, 222, 257, 292; and low of 
static perfection, 192 ; and mathe- 
matics, 54-5* *53J n Qt addicted 
to moderation, 67; not wholly 
serene, 37-9; present-day atti- 
tudes toward, 57, 820; and 
Persia, 31, 77 J an* physics, 226- 
7 ; and politics, 52, 207, 208, 217, 
295, 524, 529; religion of, 40-2, 
44, 249, 428, 499. 500; and. 
Renaissance, 525, 530; revolu- 
tions in, 213, 241, 294 ff.\ a/id 
science, 87, 153* 239^-, 763; 
and slavery, 208-9, 215, 243; 
and Sparta, 117-18; three periods, 



8 3 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Greece, Greek(s) cotad. 

of, 241; tragedy in, 37, 77; *nd 

the West, 299, 419; women in, 

115-16, 130. See also Hellenic 

world ; Hellenism 
Greek Atomistt and Epicurus, The 

(Bailey), 4 , 86 ., 89 ., 91 w., 

263 it., 267 n., 268 n. 
Greek Church, 380, 408, 482, 501, 

507. See also Eastern Church 
Greek Emperor, 408, 409, 454 
Greek Fathers, 426 
Greek language, 25, 153, 245, 306, 

366, 537-8, 788; and Alexander, 

1 20 ; and Arabs, 306 ; and biblical 

books, 333, 338, 341, 534~5 ; *<* 

Crusades, 456; and Eastern 

Empire, 298, 299; and Erasmus, 

534-7; nd Gregory the Great, _ . . 

401, 402; in Ireland, 421-2; and I Cfrossctcste, Robert, 488 

Jews, 343; and John the Scot, | Grotius, Hugo, 654 



Greek philosophy contd. 

after Democrirus, 93. See also 

Hellenistic philosophy 
Green, T. H., 629 
Gregory I (the Great St.), Pope, 

199, 3*4. 354, 3^9, 400-7, 414, 
417, 422, 435; ami St Benedict, 
398-400; and growth of papal 
power, 395, 501 ; period follow- 
ing, 408 

Gregory H (St.), Pope, 414 
Gregory HI (St.), Pope, 410 
Gregory VI, Pope, 432-3. 435 
Gregory VII (St.), Pope, 429, 432, 
435-7, 45L 501 See also Hildc- 
brand 
Gregory IX, Pope, 466, 467, 470, 

47. 501 
Gregory XI, Pope, 505, $o& 



421, 424; in Sicily, 465; and 
translations, 333, 341. 424* 456, 
461, 475, 486, 535; in Western 
Empire, 301, 302 

Greek Mathematics (Heath t, 54 n., 
85 n., 169 ft., 232 it., 238 n. 

Greek Philosophers, The (Benn), 
18111., 25411., 3031*. 

Greek philosophy, 31; and anim- 
ism, 558 ; and Arabs, 306, 447*8 ; 
and Aristotle, 182,222,253,813; 
in Athens, 393 ; atomism avoids 
faults of, 85; and barbarians, 
499-500; and change, 88; and 
Christianity, 329, 346, 34**; and 
Church, 501 ; and creation, 373 ; 
and Dionysus worship, 32; and 
ethics, 200-1, 204; and future 
life, 350; and hypotheses, 549; 
and individualism, 622; and 
justice, 45 35, ><; ><* land- 
owning, 210; and leisure, 127; 
and t mathematics, 55, 211 jff., 
247; and <nediev*J synthcti*, 
499; and Nietzsche, 788; ob- 
scurantist bias in, 83 ; and Per- 
sians, 422; and Plato, 64, 98; 
and politics, 253; religions, 34, 
56 ; scientific, 14, 74 ; and senses, 
256; and Sophists' detachment, < 
9$ ;and Sparta, i M;*nd Stoicism. 
275; J time, 17J~4I vitiated 



guardian angel, 

guardians, in Plato's Republic, 129, 

tj, 132, 134. 47, 15*. 204 
Guelfo, 465, 472, 501, 518 
Gucrtcke, Otto von, 557 
Cfuicciardtnt. FraiccMu. 522 
Cjuicci-ili, Countess, 779 
Gut*;, house of, 577 
gunpowder, 4>>S, 509 

Habeas Corpuft Act, 626 

habit, 195, 6&o, 692, Hij, 825, 841 

ll*<ie, 41, 61, 62 

Hadrian I <St.i. Pop*. 412 ^* 

lUdrum IV, Pope, 453. 454 a.. 461 

Had run, Km per or, 300 

Hague, 'i*he, 5*12, Nx> 

Halicarruiftcut. 78 

Hallcy, Edmund, 55*. *6o 

Hamburg, 7#i, 7 Ha 

Hamilton, Sir Wiiitum, Hoi 

HimJct, 6#-9* ' <X. 6ov 

Hamm, Stephen, 557 

Hammurabi, 23 

handicraft produi lion, 658 

Hannibal, 294 

Hanover 60 $ 

Hanse umm. 502 

happtnrat, 79. 310, 315, 316, 670. 
7 jo, 806-7; Mid Ansiodc, 201, 
203*4, 206, 21 a; and Bemhani, 
*>S< 750, 79<, 80$ ; and Buethiut. 



884. 



INDEX 



happi ness contd. 

390; and Epicureans, 267, 268; 

and James, 846; and Kant, 736; 

and Locke, 637-8; and Mnrx, 

816; and Schopenhauer, 784; 

and Stoics, 277, 284, 287. See 

also grctftesf happiness 
Hardxvick, Lord. See Devonshire, 

Earl of 

Harrison, Jane E., 32 ., 40, 272 
Hartley, David, 801, 802 
Harun al Rash id, 234, 442 
Harvey, William, 557, 566, 583 
Hnsdrubal. See Clitomachus 
Hasidim, 334, 33 f . 33^, 34 
llasmoncans. .SW Maccalxtj, 
hate, 774 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 705 
head, 729 

heart. 7. 7*8 7*9. 7*9, 73 1 
Heath, Sir Thomas, 54 ., 85, 

171 ., 232, 237, 238 
heaven, 30, 64, 329. 33^. 4*9. 500 
heavenly bodies, 66, 134, 152, 227, 

230, 235/T., 316, 556. 561; and 

Aristotle, 190, 229- 30; and Jews, 

Hebraic elements in Christianity, 

7*2 

Hebrew alphabet, 28 it. 
Hebrew language, 341, 343, 347, 

535; and Bible, 342, 340, 360, 

Hebrew Law, 328. Sef <j*'u l-aw ; 



He^el contd. 

815, 816, 817; and mathematics, 
832* 857; and Parmenides, 67, 
'5c, 758, 769; and Prussia, 748, 
75 7 765, 766; and relational 
propositions, 172, 759-60; and 
Rousseau, 723, 727, 764, 766; 
and State, 765-9, 771; and 
subjectivism, 514, 730 
Hcgira, 440 
Heidelberg, 757 
Heine, Heinrich, 778, 779 
Hciric of Auxerrc, 422 
heliocentric theory, 548, 551, 556. 
Sec also Copcmican hypothesis 
Heliogabalus, 303 
hell, 39, 282, 326, 378, 382, 429, 
482, 719; and Christianity, 272, 
500; and Judaism, 338; and 
Marx, 383 

Hellenic world, 78, 207, 227, 328; 
and Alexander, 183; and Asia 
Minor, 31; :nd Ionia, 31, 46; 
and Jews, 334, 336, 34i; and 
Nietzsche, 788-9; and North, 
536 ; and the rich, 94 ; and Sparta, 
loo, 120; and Rome, 240 
Hellenism, Hellenistic world, 241- 
51, 275; and Alexander, 120, 
242; decline of, 296; freedom 
dies in, 296; and Mohammed- 
ans, 294, 304-6; and other- 
worldliness, 253; and Rome, 
294, 295; religiosity in, 272-3; 
scepticism of, 257 
Hellenistic philosophy, 241, 253, 

55. 26 3 

llrloisc, 458 i 

helots. 114-15, 118, 123 
Heivetius, Claude Adrien, 748, 749, 

750, 753. 801, 804 
Henry 111, Emperor, 432, 433 452, 

Henry III of England, 502 
Henry IV, Emperof* 433, 435~7> 
i T-"*/**" ,<**, ^jw,-- / -- - 45* 

Hi4; and htory, 761-7. 812; Henry IV of France, 577 
and Hume, 698-9; influence of, Henry V, Emperor, 452 
474. 730, 74, 757; nd Kant, Ifcniy VI, Emperor. 463.405 
735. 74$. 757. 7^8, 783; and Henry VII of England, 539 
knowledge, 760, 848; and logic, 'Henry VIII of England, 4 I5> 539, 
***. 75**. 759-6o, 771-3; and 545.577.^45,659 
M*rx, 757, 767. 810, 811, 812, Henry Aristippus, 462 i 

98 S 



Hecatacus of Mtlctus, 60 

Heddernheim, 304 

Hegel, Cieorg Wtlliclm Fritfdrich, 

*>}, 141. 201. 222. 514, 069, 756, 

7 57 "7 3 i academic and schoUstu*, 
730, 781 ; and Alexander, 183, 
766 ; And Berkeley . 683, 84 1 ; and 
Uewey, 848, 851, 85 5 ; and 
dialectic, 667, 758-60, 702, 815; 
and German philosophy, 744* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Heracljdes of Pontus, 237 

Hcraclitus, 56-66, 7*, 74. 81, 143. 
171-2; and fire, 61, 62, 65; and 
flux or change, 50-60, 62-6, 172, 
833; and modem physics, 90; 
and Nietzsche, 61, 788, 800 ; and 
opposites, 60, 62, 67 ; and Plato, 
63, 74, 126, 171-4; and Stoics, 
276, 280; and strife, 60-3, 135; 
and war, 60, 6 1 

Herbert of Cherbury, Lord, 569 

hereditary power or principle, 27, 
642-7, 653 

heresy, -ies, 352, 393, 437; and 
Abelard, 458-9; and Arnold of 
Brescia, 453 ; and St. Augustine, 
365, 369. 371, 382, 519; and 
Roger Bacon, 486; and St. 
Bernard, 460; and Dominicans, 
474; in East, 401; and St. 
Francis, 471; and Frederick II, 
467 ; and Great Schism, 505 ; and 
Jesuits, 546; and John the Scot, 
426, 427 ; and raonasticism, 306 ; 
and Origen, 347; and Protest- 
antism, 550; Puritan, before 
Reformation, 455 ; and Wycliftr, 
508. See alto Albtgenses; Cath- 
ari; iconoclast heresy; Inquisi- 
tion; Motiophysite heresy; Nes- 
torianiam; Pelagian heresy; Sa- 
beUian heresy; Three Chapters; 
Wakknse* 

Hermias, 182 

Hermits, 395-6 

Hermodorus of Kphesu*, 60 

hero, -cs, 3*, 624, 766, 779 
Herod the Great, 335, 341 

Herodotus, 39, 78, itS 

heroism, 671 

Hcsiod, 59, 60, 109, 130 

Heytrsbury, 495 

High Priests, 341 

Hildeb/md, 327. Set alto Gregory 
VII * 

Hilduin, 424 

Hinduism, 781 
. Himalayas, 244 

Hincmar, 423 

Hinnom. 330 

Hipptrchus, 238, 239 * 

Hippttsos of Mctaponuon, 51 
t Hippo, 354, 364 



Hiram, King of Tyre, 28 

history, 21, 158, 733, 786; and St. 
Augustine, 375, 383 ; and Catho- 
lic philosophy, 326-7 ; and Hegel, 
762-7; Jewish, 328, 329, 338 
383; and Mane, 812-16 

History of the Ancunt World. See 
Rostovtscff 

History of England (Hume), 629, 
685-6 

History of Greece (Bury), 95, 1 14 .. 
117-18 

History of Sacerdotal Celibacy, A 
(Lea), 133 ., 431 " 

Hitler, Adolf, 157, 526, 667, 711, 
746, 775. 846 

Hirtitc tablets, 26 

Hobbcs, Thomas, 568-79, 581, 
593. 649, 650, 669, 724; and 
Church, 354, 576; and social 
contract, 572-31 654, 722; and 
sovereign, 573~4. 575. 57*>; and 
State, 568, 577~9. 766; and war, 
57*. 573. 767 

Hodgskin, Thomas. Ho 8, 809 

lloflmann, August Hcmnch, 782 

Hohenstaufcn family, 465, 491, 
501, 776 

Holbein, Ham (the Younger), 535 

Holland, 545. 5**o. 581, 582, 592, 
593; freedom and tolerance^ in, 
579. 592; liberalism tn, 20; 
Reformation in, 455 

Holy Alliance, 621, 703, 768 

Holy Roman Empire, 305, 31^ 
408, 4*0-13, 417, 45<>~*. 491. 
501 /?., 746, 765 

Holy Sepulchre, 712 

Homer, 25, 3*1, 59. 60. 77, 109, 351. 
444, 570; and Hellenic civiliza- 
tion, 28-30, 79, 295 ; and Plato, 
130; and religion, 29, 4* 

homosexual love, 123 

Hong Kong, 243 

Hononus i, Pope, 409 

iiofionus III, Pope, 427, 465 

hope, 285, 854, Set 0/jo cheerful- 
ness; optimism 

Hormce, 297, 362 

Houtf of SeUfuna (Bevan), 24$ ** 
249** 



Hugo, 



, U5. 5 
, Victor, 



70$ 



8ft, 



INDEX 



537 



Huguenots, 577, 581 

Huizinga, John, 533 n., 

human pride, 855 

humanism, 460, 509, 521, 523, 530, 

534, 537 . 

humamtarianisin, 816 

Hume, Datid/258, 629, 630, 668, 
669, 685-700, 728, 720-30; and 
Berkeley, 685, 686, 687, 689 ; and 
causation, 690-6, 698, 699; and* 
empiricism, 568, 636-7, 685. 698, 
699, 862; influence of, 669, 731 ; 
and Ix>cke, 636-7, 668, 685, 698, 
739; and perception, 686, 688, 
694; and Rousseau, 698, 717; 
and subjectivism, 256, 5x3, 739 

humility, 324, 339, 5^o, 855. 856 

Hundrcyi Days, 778 

Hungarians. 417, 419, 428 

Hungary, 659 

hunger, 774 

Huns, 363. 386 

HUBS, John. 506, 509 

Hussite*, 470 

Hutcheson, Francis. 802 

Hutton, Ven. W. 11.. cited, 400 

hydrogen. 45 

Hyk&oH, 22, 24 

hymns, 460 

HypatU, 3*7 



hypotheses, 57* 146, I4S. 153. 261, j 

548, 540. 551, 552, 843; and 
I-rancis Itacon, 566-7; and 
7;rcck*. 44-5. 47, 235; and 
James, 844-5; ^d science, 153. | 

549. See a/J<> Copcrnican hypo- '. 
the*i; nebular hypothesis 

hypothetical imperative, 737 j 

Hyrcamtft, John. See Maccab-rus j 

i 

lachimo, 544 

Iw>. 544 

laklahaoth, 344 

Ibn Uufthd. See Avrrroes 

Ibn Sim. See Avicrtina 

iconoclast heresy, 409 

idealism, 146, 635, 680-4, 819, 836, 

837 841. 846* See u/io German 

philosophy 

ideal*, and Utopias. 136-7 
ideatt): association of, 801-2, H6i ; 

and Bergion, 829, 831; and 



idea(s) omfcf. 

Berkeley, 676, 729; and Des- 
cartes, 588; and Hume, 686-7, 
79 ; innate, 292, 688 ; and Locke, 
634 729; world of, 158, 308. 
See also theory of ideas 

identity, 490, 689, 694 

ideograms, 22 

idolatry, 330-1, 3$5 

idols, Francis Bacon's, 566 

Ignatius, Patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, 415, 416 

Ikhnaton (Amenhotep IV), 27, 471 

Iliad, 28 

illiteracy, 4x0 

imagination, 57, 687 

Immaculate Conception, 489 

immortality, 64, 376; and Aristotle, 
192-4; and Aquinas. 476; and 
Averroes, 447, 475; and Epi- 
curus, 269, 274; and Greeks, 
350; and Jews, 335, 346; and 
Kant, 736; and More, 542; and 
Plato, 125, 154-64, 276, 611, 
863; and Plotinus, 316; and 
Pythagoras, 51, 56; and Socrates, 
109; and Spinoza, 594; and 
Stoics, 276, 288. See also after- 
life ; resurrection ; soul 

imperatives, 737 

imperialism, 420, 750, 804, 820 

impiety, 856 

impression(s), 686-7, 690, 729 

impulse. 33-4 

Incarnation, 152, 347, 352, 370, 
377, 387-8* 441, 475* 482, 535 

Incas, 136 

incest, 393, 481 

incommensu rabies, 54 

independence, 215, 768 

Independents, 493, 577. 625, 626, 
628 

indeterminacy, 269 n. 

India, 245, 282 n., 3g5. 4"J 5*7, 
560, 804; and Alexander, 256; 
and Arabs, 4*9, 44<>, 444, 448; 
Nestorianism in, 388; religions 
of, 42, 241, 781 

Indian philosophy, 746. 781, 784, 

, Indians, American, 647, 660 

I individual(s), -ism, 201, 205, 284, 

[ 366, 657, 664, 754; and Hegel, 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



individual(s), -ism tontcL 
7*7 ff : , 855; and Hclveuus, 749; 
and liberalism, 622; and Nietz- 
sche, 855 ; and Reformation, 545 ; 
and Renaissance, 516, 524, 855; 
and romanticism, 703, 705 ; and 
Rome, 253; and Rousseau, 623, 
722; and Totalitarian State, 725 
jndividuation, 489-90, 783 
induction, 58, 222, 571, 733, 823, 
860; and Francis Bacon, 563, 
564-7; and Hume, 693, 729; as 
independent logical principle, 
700; by simple enumeration, 565, 
567, 693 

indulgences, 535, 545 
industrial revolution, 664, 854 
industrialism, 52, 217, 621, 624, 
660, 672, 703, 754-5. 7/8, 854; 
and Marx, 823, 817 
inequality, 213, 714 
inferences, 179-80, 221, 222 
infinite collection or number, 857-8 
Inge, W. R., 65, 130, 308-9 
injustice, 278 
Innocent HI, Pope, 463-5, 468, 

470,471,472,501,502 
Innocent IV, Pope, 467 
Innocent VIII. Pope, 523 
inquiry, 847, 850, 851-3 
Inquiry' into Human L*ndtntatndtn& 

(Hume), 685 
Inquiry into .Meaning and Truth 

(Russell), 491 
Inquisition, 470, 472, 546, 548, 556, 

592, 723 

insight, J-ft, 15** i 

instinct, 82 1, 825-6, 838 ' 

instrumcrnfcilism, 52, 587, 81 1, 8iu, 

848, 855 I 

instruments, 557 i 

intellect, -ualiarn, 158, 290, 437, [ 
475. 4*$, 746. 75 1 i nd Ikrgvon, I 
faftSas-i. &**, 831. 837; *nd ; 
God, 608; 736; and PUto, 126, j 
148; *nd Pkttimis, 312-13, 318; 1 
and truth, 845 1 

intelligence, 79, 821 

interest, 209-10 ! 

intemationalmn, 579.652.664,709, I 
79>- Sft atw world federation * j 

intolerance, 350. W alu> religious " 
toleration j 



intoxication, 32, 33, 34, 856 

intuition, 53, 482, 636, 728, 734, 
739, 74*. 821, 825-6, 831 

investiture, 435-6. 45*, 453 

lona, 396 

Ionia, -ns, 25, 26, 27, 41, 43, 49, 59, 
110; and Athensr99; 100; com- 
mercial cities of, 43 ; and culture, 
47. 77; *nd Homer, 31 ; laws of, 
121 ; and Persia, 31, 46, 47, 77, 
99; and philosophy, 40, 59. 67, 
74, 81, 82, 85 

Iphigenia. 30, 272 it. 

Ireland, 362 ft., 386, 396, 400, 406, 
414. 4*-*. 4*6 

Irene, Empress, 409, 412, 442 

iron, 26, 44. 134 

irrationals, 232-3, 234 

irrigation, 443 

Isabella, Queen of Spain, 577 

Isaiah, 332-3 

I&htar, 23. 330 

Islam, 336, 345. 40. 44 1. 442. 45 , 
785. 6V r also Mohammedan* 

Ispahan, 445 

Israel, 329, 380 

iMna, 403 

Iuly.49, 35^. 3*3. 433> 56; Ariam 
n. 354. 355^6; and Attib, 387; 
and Charlemagne, 40$, 412; 
cnics of, 207, 454, 466, 504,^31 ; 
aviiizaiion of, 394; Clunwic 
Reform in, 431; cotmncrctdl 
ckftn in, 324; and Donancn^ut' 
Consuntinc, 412; Knismui in, 
535* in fifteenth century, 5<*> 
516, 526; and Frederick II. 
466-7; and Germany, 452, 765; 
and Goth*. 386, 389; inquisi- 
tion in, 546; humaniam in, 509; 
rue of laity in, 501 ; land- 
holding in, 658; Ixmibard* and 
Byxantiiiet in. 408-9, m Middle 
Ar, 450, 509; modem outlook 
bcjpn* tn. 516; and Nspoktin, 
778; Normant in, 419. 43? < 
politics in, 324, 56^.. 526 7, 
and pap^y, 324, 408. 436, 502. 
power of gcntrrnmrni in, 57^ 
pragmatism in, 8<6; Reforaiatum 
and Coanicr-Kefomwtion m* re- 
bellion agiiiurt, 544; Kenatstaruc 
in, $16*24* 5*3^. 547; a^ 



INDEX 



Italy tontd. 

Rome, 285, 295. 322; and 
science, 512, 556; in sixth cen- 
tury, 393-4. 401 ; under Theo- 
doric, 389; in tenth century, 417; 
unity 0^23. 528; under Valen- 
tinian II, 350. See also northern 
Italy; Rome; southern Italy 

lacobins, -ism, 664, 667 ' 

James, St., 344, 4<>3 

James I, 563 

James II, 626-7, 645 

James, Henry, 839 

James, M. R., 4 

James, William, 787. 819, 828. 839- 
46, 847, 861 , 863 ; and belief, 348, 
842-4, 845-6; and truth, 145, 
842-6 

James of Venice, 461 

Janscnists, 354 

jansenius, Cornelius, 364 

Japan. 134. 49. 5*>, 577. ^44 

Jarrow, 414 

Jason, Jewish high priest, 334 

Jaxartes, 241 

Jeans. Sir J. II.. 55. 850 

Jehovah. 469 

Jena, 745. 747, 757. 782 

Jcnghiz Khan, 304, 596 

JenftTuah, 330, 331 

Jerome, St., 283, 353, 356. 360-4, 
403, 487; and Bible, 33^. 34*. 
447, 354, 3<*>. 380, 535; and 
ErasmuA, 535, 537*. and nvmasti- 
"n, 354. 3<A 307 

Jerusalem, 319, 330, 331, 334, 335. 
359, 384, 411; ami Crusades, 
4'-4, 466; fall of, 337, 34-: the 
(ioldcn. 326; patriarch of, 410 

Jesuits, 129, 545-6* 548, $$o, 581, 
7^0 

Jesus, 329. 344, 345* 37O, 3<>7, 4>o. 
482 a.. 800 

Jews, Judaism, 344, 358, 60 1 ; and 
after-life. 350; and St. Augustine, 
377. 380. 382-3 ; * bankers and 
capitalists, 210, 503, 709; and 
Christianity, 304, 339> 343. 344 
345"6. 347, 340750. 35 / 47>, 
500; and civilization of western 
Europe, 302. 419; and God, 165, 
348; and Greeks, 43-4; * nd 



Jews, Judaism contd. 

Gregory the Great, 403; and 
Hellenism, 246, 249; and mira- 
cles, 351; and Mohammedans, 
306, 440; and Nietzsche, 788, 
792; and Old Testament, 360, 
380; pattern of history of, 383; 
persecuted, 336-7, 342, 387, 44L 
452, 455; religion of, 249, 328- 
43. 349J and sense of sin, 365; 
in Spain, 440, 448-9, 470; 
and Spinoza, 592; and State, 
382; theology of, 346, 448-9; 
and usury, 66 1. See also Hebrew 
. . .; law; Mosaic Law; Yahweh 

Joachim of Flora, 460 

Joan of Arc, St., 109, 470 

Job, 799 

Johannes Scotus. See John the Scot 

Johannesburg, 249 

John, St., 313, 346, 459, 482 

John XI, Pope, 418 

John XII, Pope, 418 

John XXII, Pope, 472, 491, 504 

John XXIII, Pope, 506 

John, King of England, 464 

John of Gaunt, 504, 508 

John of Salisbury, 458, 461 

John the Scot (Johannes Scotus 
Erigena\ 327, 415. 421-7, 437, 
439, 478 

Johnson, Samuel, 704 

Jonathan, high priest, 335 

Jonson, Ben, 569 

Joppa, 335 

Jordan of Saxony, 472 

Joseph of Arimathea, 4^7 n. 

Joshua, 550 

Jovtnian, 481 

Jowett, Benjamin, 105 M., 154 n. 

Jubilee, 502 

Judah, 329, 330. 33 

Judaism, see Jews 

Judas Iscariot, 492, jfcfo 

Jude, St., 338 

Judca, 245, 336, 341 

Judges, 380 ., 382 

judiciary, judicial function, 655, 

661-3 - . 

Julian, the Apostate, 31$, 35*. 353. 

356. 359. 55 

Julius II. Pope, 519, 532. 53 
Juno, 375 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Jupiter, 375, 376, 404; planet, 556 

jus gentium, 292 

jus naturale t 292 

justice, 205-6* 259, 662-3, 738; 
and Aristotle, 196, 202, 213 ; and 
Greeks, 45-6; and Heraclitus, 
6 1 , 63 ; as interest of the stronger, 
99; and Plato, 129, 134-6 

Justin I, 389 

Justina, 355. 357 

Justinian I, 299, 353, 389, 393~4, 
418, 422; closes Academy, 80, 
300; importance of, 400, 406; 
law of, 460 

Jutes, 421 

Kant, Immanuel, 494, 629, 748; 
academic and scholastic, 730, 
781; and arithmetic, 740, 859; 
and British and Continental 
philosophy, 568, 580, 666, 667, 
669; and Coleridge, 667, 705, 
801; and deductive reasoning, 
55; ethics of, 205, 291, 660-70, 
736-8, 806; and German philo- 
sophy, 6 1 8, 667, 730, 731-2. 746, 
757; and God, 438, 608, 609, 
610, 735-6, 814, 863; and Hume, 
685, 698; influence of, 474* 7JO, 
746, 748, 80 1 ; and knowledge, 
730, 732, 783; and liberalism, 
667, 731, 748; and mathematics, 
221, 740, 857; and Nietzsche, 
789, 797; and peace, 738, 768; 
philosophy of, outlined, 731-9; 
and Schopenhauer, 781, 782, 
783; an6 space and time, 168, 
* 374. 739-44; nd subjectivism, 
514, 730, 734; *nd Stoics, 279. 
291 ; and will, 787 
Kantorouk/, Hermann, 467 n. 
Keats, John, 272, 705 
Kent, 406 

Keplei, Joh}nnea, 153, 230, 234, 
55'-3. 56o, 569, 571 ; and Coper- 
nicus, 512, 551; and Galileo, 
555; ind Newton, 561; and 
science, 547 
Khiva, 445 

Khoraatan, 445 f 

Khwaraxmi, J, 444 

Kindj,aJ-, 443. 487. 
1 kinetic theory of gases, 85-6 



Kingdom of Heaven, 308, 329 

I Kings, 4>4 

Klytaimnestra, 30 

knights, in Rome, 295 

knowledge, 87, 179, 689, 772, 786, 
819, 860, 862; and Christian 
ethics, 1 1 1 ; arfd Continental 
philosophy, 568; and Dewey, 
851 ; and Hume, 688; and Kant, 
! f 730, 732. 783 5 and Locke, 633-4, 
636; and Marx, 812; and Mat- 
thew of Aquasparta, 489; of 
mystics, 785-6 ; and Occam, 495- 
7; and Plato, 125, 142, 143, 151, 
171-81 ; and Schopenhauer, 784, 
786; and Socrates, 112, i$7ff.\ 
and Spinoza, 596. See also theory 
of knowledge , 

Knossos, 24, 261 

Knox, Ronald, 673 

Kftnigsberg, 731. 742 

Koran, 44.446 

labour, 248, 658, 707 

Labour Party, 817 

labour theory of value, 660- 1, So8 

Lacedaemon, 114, 119, 363. See 

alto Sparta 
Laches (Plato), i j i 
Laconia, 114, 115 
La Flc4Ae, 580, 591 t 

latMUi-fasre, 631, 648, So? 
toty, 322, 323, 410,409 
Lamarck, 752, 753 *~ 

Lampsacus, 248, 264 
land, 22, 658, 817 
landholding, 114, 115, 119, 121 

210, 296, 647,658^, 815 
Unfranc, 435. 437 
language, 68-71, 43. 4#-9, * 8 5. 

1 86, 571. See olio grammar; 

logical analysis; name*; lyntux; 

words 

Laplace, 559, 73* 
U RocheUe, 581 

Last Judgment, 338, 375, 4*8, 476 
Latff Grtek Religion (Be van), 262, 

279 n. 

Latcran, 411, 418 
Latin America, 213 
Latin Emperor, 464 
Latin language, 366, 411, 448, 508, 

568, 570, 628, 746; and Burba- 



INDEX 



Latin language contd. Leibniz contd. 

rpssa, 451; and Bible, 354; and 668-9; and plenum, 90; and 

principle of individuation, 490; 
and Spinoza, 592 ; and subjectiv- 
ism, 513, 728; and substance, 614 



Charlemagne, 414; in Eastern 

Empire, 301 ; and Erasmus, 534, 

537. 538; and Greeks, 299; and 

hymns, 460.; and Ireland, 421 ; Leipzig, 604 

and philosophy, 306, 368; and leisure, 127,814 

Roman Empire, 298; and trans- Lenin, 848 

lations, 165, 235, 342, 380, 445* Leo I (the Great), St., Pope, 387, 

448, 456, 535 388 

Latin world, and Alexander, 499 Leo III, St., Pope, 412 

Latvia, 659 Leo IX, St., Pope, 433 

Laud, Archbishop, 569, 601 Leo X, Pope, 518, 520, 527 

law(s), legislation, 34, 120, 222, Leo XIII, Pope, 474 

652-3, 663; and Aristotle, 213; Leo III (the Isaurian), Emperor, 

in Athens, 95, 154-5; and 409 

Bentham, 638, 750, 802, 803, Leonardo. See Vinci 

805 ?of causality, 567 ; of gravita- Leopardi, 252 

tion, 553-4, 556-7, 559-61 ; and Letter of Aristeas, 33411. 

Greeks, 135, 139; of Hammu- Lettres phUosophiquef (Voltaire), 

rabi, 23; Hebrew, Jewish, or 629 

Mosaic, 328, 332, 337, 34<>. 365 ; Leucippus, 84, 85. 86, 88, 89 ., 90, 

and Hegel, 764; and Helvetius, 229. 266 

749; of inertia, 549, 553, 554; Leuctra, 118 

and Kant, 737; of motion, 553, I^evant, 778 

556, 559; natural, 86; ol nature, Leviathan (Hobbes), 568^. 

99, 650-1; philosophy of, 651; 

of planetary motion, 551-2, 



556-7; and Protagoras, 96 
tawrence, O. H., 708 
o*f (Plato), 232 
I>ea. Henry C, 133, 431, 503 
League for Peace, Kant's, 768 
I.tague of Cambrat, 517 
league of Nations, 768 
U-ar, 795 
learning, 342, 396, 397, 4<>4. 42 1, 

422, 472; in Renaissance, $33 
IXT, Joseph, quoted, 648 
I^reuwenhock, Anton van, 557 
legal Actions, 412. 658 
Icgul rights, 651-2 
legal theory of war, 652 
legislative function, legislature, 

66i-3. 726, 738 
Ixgnano, 454 
Uibniz, 604- IQ, 733 ; and calculus, 

55**, 857; and ethics, 669; and 

Germany, 746; and God, 438, 



Leviticus, 332 

Lcyden, University of, 582 

liberal culture, 513 

liberalism, liberals, 577, 578, 620-1, 
649, 817; and Darwin, 753, 754. 
808; and Dewey, 847, 848; in 
eighteenth and nineteenth cen- 
turies, I2i, 545, 774; and Hegel, 
764, 767; in Holland, 592; and 
Kant, 667, 731, 748;,and Locke, 
628 ; and Milton, 81 1 ; and More, 
542; and Napoleon, 779; New 
England, 847; and Nietzsche, 
794; philosophical, 620-7; and 
State, 215, 771; in Western 
Germany, 747 

liberty, 624, 776; and Bentham, 
803; and Churches, 793; and 
Filmer, 643; and Hobbes, 572, 
574-5; and Locke, 637-9, 650; 
and Machiavelli, 530; for na- 
tions, 709; and Rousseau, 722; 
and utilitarianism, 653 



59, 7i8; and infinite number, .life, 841; and Bergson, 820, 823, 
<8; influence of, 667; nd 824, 827, 838; elixir of, 62 
Kant, 731 ; *nd knowledge, 634; light-waves, 90, 862 
nd Locke, 633, 666; method of, f l limitation, 734 

891 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Lincoln, Abraham, 796 

Ljppershey, Hans, 557 

Lisbon, earthquake of, 715, 731 

Lithuania, 659 

Liutprand, 409 

Lives (Plutarch), 26011., 300, 713, 

793 

Livy, 529 

Lloyd George, 659 
Loches, 457 

Locke, John, 285, 581, 711, 728, 
729, 813; and association of 
ideas, 801 ; and Bentham, 802; 
and British philosophy, 618; on 
checks and balances, 577; and 
Condorcet, 749; and Democri* 
tus, 92; on division of powers, 
724; and empiricism, 685, 856, 
862 ; and greatest-happiness prin- 
ciple, 802 ; and Helve'tius, 749 : 
and Hobbes, 568, 573; and 
Hume, 685, 698; influence of, 
666-72 ; and liberalism, 624, 817 ; 
and mind, 749; political philo- 
sophy of, 642-5; and power, 
530; and private property, 724; 
and social contract, 650, 653-8, 
722; and State, 652, 664, 771; 
and subjectivism, 513, 739; and 
theory of knowledge, 628-41 
Locri, 49 
logarithms, 558 

logic, 257, 633, 77. 772, 815, 862; 
and Abelard, 459; and Al- 
Mansur, 446 ; and Aquinas, 484 ; 
and Arabs, 446, 447; and Aris- 
totle, I82 1 , 187, 218*25, 447. 475. 
513; and atomists, 88 n.; and 
Roger Bacon, 487; and Bergton, 
82 J, 823, 830, 831; deductive, 
and mathematics, 858; and Dew- 
ey, 847, 851; and dialectic 
method, 113; and empiricism, 
87* '678, 62; and geometry. 
740, 742; and Greek philosophy, 
87; and Hegel, 730, 758-60, 769, 
773; .and Hume. 688, 689. 690; 
and induction, 700; and John 
of Salisbury, 461 ; and Kant, 
*733; language, 71 ; and Leibniz, 4 
614-15; and Locke, 630; and 
Marx, 814; and Occam, 494, 
495*7; d Parmcnide*, 50, 67, 



logic contd. 

142; and Plato, 143, 161, 179. 

181, 377; and Socrates, 158; and 

space, 90; and Spinoza, 594, 599. 

618; and Stoics, 281. See also 

logical analysis 
Logic (Hegel), 758. 761, ^69 
logical analysis, 495, 857-64. See 

also language 
'Logos. 313, 329, 346, 370, 425, 426, 

459 

Lollards, 509 

Lombard cities, 450, 452, 453, 466 
Lombard League, 452, 454, 466 
Lombards, 353, 394, 397-8, 403. 

420; and Byzantines, 326, 40^-9; 

and Eastern Empire, 401 ; and 

papacy, 408, 412 
Ix>mbardy, 470, 503 
London, 569, 704. 809, Si i 
Long Parliament, 545, 569, 570, 

625 

Lords, House of, 509, 574, 642, 662 
Lorenzo the Magnificent, r<v \K- 

dici, Lorenzo dei 
Lothar II, King of Lorraine-, 4<5 
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann, 6oS. 74* 
Louis 1. Emperor, 424 
Ixtuis II, Emperor, 415 
Louis IV, Emperor, 491 
IXHJIS IX of France, 467 

Louis XI of France. 509, 577. 645 
Louts XII of France, 520 
Louis XIV of France, 604, 6f/ 

627, 645 
Lou vain, 538 
love, 708, 799, Bop; Christian, 602, 

774. 795 i *nd Empedodc*. 74-5. 

76; of the eternal, 814 ; and t*od, 

345* 59&-6op, 608; and Judaism, 

340; of neighbours, 345, 7oS; 

and Nietzsche, 795, 800; and 

Plato, 312; and Plotinus. 315; 

and Stoicism, 279, 287. 289 
Low Countries. 747 
Loyola, St. Ignatius, 472, 544. 



Lucan, 183 
Lucsan, 262, 302 
Luck, 247 
Lucrrtia, 376 

Lucretius, 72, 266, 268, 270-3, 
*74.79 



INDEX 



Luther, Martin, 493, S**. 532. 544. Manchester, 8xo 
765. 784; and St. Augustine, Manchester School, 623 
354; and Copernicus, 550; and 
Erasmus, 533, 538; and peas- 
ants* war, 508; and philosophy, 
546; and State, 545. 766 

Lutheran Church, 766 

Luttcnvorth, 507, 509 

Lycurgus, 117, 119, 121-3, 529. 
53*. 714. 7*1, 7*5 



Lydia, 27, 4.1 
Lyons, 503, 712; 

469. 471 
Lysis (Plato), 1 1 1 



Manfred, King of Naples and 

Sicily, 520, 777 
Manichaeism, 156, 345, 364, 368-9, 

370, 371, 372, 379, 469, 613 
Manichseus, 368 
Manilius, 260 
many, the, 60, 74, 88, 756 
1 Marathon, 77, 99, 100 



Prior Men of, 



Macbeth, 602 

Maccabtrus, John Hyrcanus, 339 
Maccabeus, Judas, 335 
Maccabees, 246, 335, 336, 338, 339 
Macedonia, -ns ( 182, 207, 241-6, 

297; and barbarians, 243; and 

City State, 215; bring disorder, 

241, 248, 273, 296; and Greek 

culture, 253, 305 ; and Rome, 294 
Machiavclii, Nicco!6, 214, 513, 523, 

525-32, 547. 568, 578, 7*5. 765. 

788 
machine production, 514, 746, 752, 

754~5. 809, 854 
McKcnna, Stephen, 312 
Mawads, 35, 38 
maffic, 23, 49, 7*. 169. 250, 261, 

270, 319, 348, 4HS; black. 499; 

ij Renaissance, 52^; and science, 

55* 

Maima Carta. 463 
Matfiu Graecin, 67. 77 
Magnanimous man, 197-8, 199, 

200 

Manet, 44. 557. 5*6 
Maimonidrft, 343, 448-9 
majority, 97. 109, 492, 573. $55. 

657, 7*4. 73. 764, 790 
Malchus. 6V* Porphyry 
Makbrmnche, 474, 583, 605 
Malthus, Humus Robert, 750, 75 

753.8o8 
man : brotherhood of, 287, 288, 289. 

305 ; and Copernicus, 816; nieas- 



Marcion, 469 

Marcomanni, 303 

Marcus Aucelius, 217, 263, 275, 
276, 282, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288, 
289, 296, 303 

Marduk, 23 

Mark Antony . See Antonius, Marcus 

Marozia, 418 

marriage, 122, I3*~3. *57> '97, 
345.431.481,484, 541 

Mars, 552 

Marseilles, 404 

Marsiglio of Padua, 492, 493, 503- 
4.508 

Marston Moor, 776 

Martel, Charier. See Charles Mattel 

Martin I (St.). Pope, 409 

Martin V, Pope, 506 

Martin of Tours, St., 396 

Marx, Karl, 75 75*. 756, 801 n., 
809, 810-18; and Bentham, 805, 
811; and class struggle, 578-9, 
766, 818; and Darwinism, 754; 
and De\\ ey , 848 ; eclecticism, 666 ; 
and Hegel, 757, 810, 811-12, 
815, 816, 817; and history, 383, 
762, 812-17; and labour theory 
of value, 660, 66 1 ; and liberal- 
ism , 624, 667, 817; and revolt, 
703, 746, 774J and Plato, 160; 
and State, 813, 817 

Mary, Queen of England, 645 

Mary, Queen of Scots, 643 f 

Master of Animals, 24 

Mssuccio di Salerno, 522 

materialism, 8911., 9*. *&9 2 73. 
310, 570, 590, 837, 839; and 
Marx, 383. 809, 810, 8n. 812, 
815; in psychology, 802; and 



urcofall things, 97. 17*. 173. 75. i Stoics 2 75. *76. *8i, 311 
1 79J place of, muni verse, 55<H>; I mathematical logic, 614-15, 619 
undue emphasis cm, 816. S** \ mathematics, 51, 53; in Athens, 
o/o rights of man I 79. &>, oo; in AJexandria, 80, 

893 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



mathematic 



it* 



246; and Aquinas, 484; and 
Anbt, 448; and Aristotle, 193; 
and astronomy, 153, 231, 235- 
40; and atoxnists, 88 it.; and 
Francis Bacon, 565; and Roger 
Bacon, 486, 487, 488; and 
Bergson, 823, 830-2; and Con- 
tinental philosophy, 568; and 
deductive logic, 858; and Des- 
cartes, 580, 583, 589; and em- 
piricism, 568; and Greeks, 21, 
31, 57-8, 231, 235-40, 857, 862; 
in Hellenistic age, 241 ; and 
Hobbes, 568; and Hume, 689; 
and induction, 221; and Kant, 
733. 740; and knowledge, 161, 
633, 689. 860, 862; and Locke, 
630; and logical analysis, 857, 
859; in Magna Grecia, 67; and 
nous, 313; and philosophy, 246, 
858, 862; and Plato, 126, 141, 
146, 148, 153, 158, 168-70, 177. 
1 81, 192; and Plotinus, 312; and 
Pythagoras, 47. 49, 5*. 5*. 53-*. 
158. 857; in seventeenth cen- 
tury, 546, 558; and Socrates, 
158; and Stoics, 281 ; and syllog- 
isms, 221-2; and theology, 56, 
848; words of, 181 

matter, 65, 82, 345, 860, 86 1 ; and 
Aristotle, 187-9, io*, iQ3. "9; 
defined, 684; and Bergson. 820, 
822, 823, 825, 836, 837; and 
Berkeley, 673, 674, 679. 7^9; and 
Descartes, 90 ; and Dun* Scotut, 
490; and Hegel, 763 ; and Hume, 
729; and Kant, 73. 74 ; rd 
Manr, 812; and Plato, 169; and 
Pkninus, 315-17; *nd space, 89* 
90; and truth, 707. ** alto 
mind and matter 

Motto and Memory (Bergson), 
824-6, 83* 

Matthew of Aquasparta, 486, 488 9 

Maupemiis, 747 

Maurice, I~mperor, 405 

Mauross, Andre, quoted, 778 *. 

fyfaximus, Empeior, 355, 357 

Maya, 7*4, 7*6 f 

Maxztni, Giuseppe, 708 

meaning, 850. &* oho words 



Mecca, 440 n., 443 

mechanical explanations, 82, 86, 

87. 6, 754 

mechanics, 227, 584-5, 821, 860 
Medta (Euripides), 568 
Medes, 244, 303, 330 
Medici family, 27/518, 520, 521, 

5S. 56, 544. 797 
Medici, Coaimo dei, 518, 521 
f Medici, Giovanni dei. See Leo X, 

Pope 
Medici, Giulio. See Clement VII, 

Pope 

Medici, Lorenzo dei, 518, 52 t r 526 
Medici, Fictro dei, 518 
medicine, 49. 73. 334,445.448, 537, 

839 

medieval synthesis, 463, 501 
Medina, 440 n. 

Mrditotiow (Descartes), 569. 585-9 
Meditations (Marcus Aurclius), 284, 

287-9, 293 
Mediterranean, 236, 282, 294, 419, 

642 

Melctus, 105, 106, 107, 108 
N.lelot, 101 

| Melville, Herman, 705 
s memory, 71, 173, 175, 3, 681, 
; 684, 841; and Uerg*on, 824-5, 
| 826, 835-6, 838 
1 Menandcr, 251, 346 

Menandcr, king of India, 245 
Meno (Plato), 112, 161, 46 2 
Mercury, 237 * 

Merovingians, 409, 575 
Mesopotamia, 22. 24, 245, Ji *. 396 
; Messalins, Valeria, 282 
j Messenia, us 
Messiah, 320, 332, 338, 339. 348, 

3&o. 383, 467 
| metallurgy, 338, 714 

mctaU, 24 

! metaphysics, 57, 71, **, 39 
688; and Arabs, 447, 448; and 
Aristotle, 182-94, 205, 218, 222- 
4; and Borthiut, 390; and Con- 
tinental and Bntttth philosophy. 
669; and Fpicurus, 269; ami 
Hrgrl. 67, 758. 769. 770; " 
HeUrnistic world, 251 ; and Hem- 
clitus, jJ9, 62*4; Jewish, 320: 
and Leibniz, 614-15, 6 f 7! and 
Locke, 633 ; and Kant, 739. 74* ' 



894 



INDEX 



metaphysics contd. 

3; mistakes in, 53, 220, 222; and 
Occam, 495; and Parmenides, 
67, 151; and Plato, 143-4, 151, 
187, 189, 218; and Plottnus, 312; 
and Spinoza, 594-5, 600- 1 ; and 
Zeno, 296 

Metaphysics (Aristotle), 229, 444 

Metapontion, 49, 51 

Methodism, 40, 272, 776 

Methuselah, 380 

metre, 161 

Metrodorus, 265 

Mexico, 22, 644, 854 

Michael II, 424 

Michael III, 416, 423 

Michael of Ccscna, 491 

Michchngclo, 523, 552, 789 

microscope, 557 

Middle Ages, 28, 322, 624, 855; 
snd Aristotle, 121, 207, 2 1 8, 230, 
257. 439, 494-5 I and St. Augus- 
tine, 382; and Bocthius, 389, 
392; and Byron, 776, 778; and 
Church, 1 2 1, 210, 305, 322, 354, 
415. 5i~3, 766; and City of 
l*od, 375; communist rebels in, 
774; despised in fifteenth cen- 
tury. 509; die hard. 509; and 
Donation of Constantino, 411; 
dualism of. 252 ; snd economics, 
754; snd Gregory the Great, 
402; and individualism, 622; 
fnd Italian cities, 207; Jews in, 
343 ; and kings, 359 i o"d land- 
holdtng, 659; snd law of nature, 
648; legal fictions in, 412; and 
lope, 218, 292; snd Lucretius, 
271 ; Mohammedan civilization 
in. 343 ; originality and archaism 
in, 450-1; and philosophy, 56, 
210, 222, 322, 354, 439. S i. 766; 
snd Pluto, 165, 438-9, 474; and 
Plutintis, 309; and politics, 207. 
419; and pseudo-Dion ynius, 424, 
427 ; snd romanticism, 704 ; and 
in, 560; submissive toward nan- 
human environment, 855; and 
superstition, 549; and Stoics, 
292 ; and transufatantiation, 429; 
universality of Church and Em- 
pire in, 305; unscientific. 549 



Middle Ages contd. 

See also Church; Holy Roman 

Empire; papacy 
middle class, 509, 621, 654, 671, 

754, 813 

Mikado, 134, 644 

Milan, 355, 357, 359, 364, 367, 
3 6 9, 430; in conflict of Emperor 
and Pope, 436, 451 j(f.; Patarine 
movement in, 434, 453, 455; in 
Renaissance, 516-17, 520 

Milesian school, 43-7, 60, 243 

Miletus, 43, 45, 47, 4$, 49, 81, 84, 
H7 

Milhaud, Gaston, 88 n. 

Milky Way, 555 

Mill, James, 749, 750, 751, 801, 
804. 808, 809, 818 

Mill, John Stuart, 567. 669, 748, 
749.751,790,804,805-6 

millennium, 381, 383 

Milton, John, 157, 247, 359 n. t 470, 
732,804,811 

mind, 849, 86 1; and Anaxagoras, 
81-3; and Aristotle, 192-4; and 
Uergson, 823, 824, 827; and 
Locke, 729: and Plato, 167, 
1 68, 174, 176; and Plotinus, 
312, 318; and Spinoza, 595, 600 ; 
and Zeno, 279 

mind and matter, 156, 840; and 
Bcrgson. 824-6, 828; and Carte- 
sians, 584, 588, 590; defined, 
684; and James, 841 ; and Kant, 
730; and Leilniz, 606; and 
i logical analysis, 86 1, 864 
! Minoan age or culture, 24-5, 26, 
I 27, 304 

! miracle(s), 49, 72, 348, 35O, 360, 
398-400, 685 ; of the mass, 429 

missionaries, 245, 395, 43 4*i, 
456. 546 

Mistress of Animals, 24, 261 

Mithraism, 304 

Mitylene, 264 

Mnesarchos, 48 

modality, 734 

moderation, 61, 92 



Moh; 
* 46; 



77< 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Mohammedan(s) cvntd* 
299; and algebra, 306; and Aris- 
totle, 447* 448, 449, 475; and 
chemistry, 62, 448 ; and Christian 
philosophy, 447-8; and Church. 
305 ; conquests of, 245, 353, 388, 
410, 419, 440; and culture, 440- 
4; and Frederick II, 465; and 
Greek culture, 299, 443, 444; 
and Hellenistic civilization, 294, 
306-7; and Italy, 419; and Jews, 
343, 441, 448; and philosophy, 
444-9; and Sicily, 465, 466. See 
also Arabs ; Islam 

Mommsen, Theodor, 748 

tnonadology, monads, 606-7, 611, 
619, 668, 728 

monasteries, 395, 396, 4 14. 4, 43 1 

monasticism, 349, 354, 39S~9 406. 
4i8,430-i,535 

Monboddo, Lord, 649 

Monde, Lt (Descartes), 581 

money, 160, 200-10 

Mongols, 386, 442, 444 

Monica, St., 367, 370, 371 

monism, 76, 85, 88, 135, 600, 6iS, 
841,861 

Mnnophysite heresy, 388-9, 393, 

396,440 
monopoly, 817 
monotheism, 336, 441 
Mont Cenis, 436 
Montaigne, 537 
Montaigu, 713 
Monte Casstno, 397*8, 309, 4 '7, 

474 

Montesquieu, Baron de, 529, 573, 
629. 664, 724. 7*6 

Montfort, Simon de, 464 

Moody, Ernest E., 494 

moan* 229, 315, 338, 369, 556; and 
Greeks, 73, 81, 82, 91. 107, 7, 
229. 236, 239, 270, *8o, 314 : and 
BrmJle, ssj; and Galileo and 
Newton, 556 

Moore, G. E., 682 

Moors, 299. 343* 4Oi, 409 

moral(s), morality, 23, 33, 97, W* 
206, 707, 863; and Uentham, 
'805; and Christianity, 200, 325, 
3^6* 350, 35>; nd Oennarf 
idealists, 730; in Greece, 302 ; in 
Hellenistic world, 250-1, 260; 



), morality contd* 
and James, 844; Jewish, 334; 
and Kant, 736-7, 783; and 
Locke, 637 ./f., 653 ; and Machia- 
velli, 528, 530; and Milesian 
school, 47; and reform in the 
eleventh century, 428-, and reli- 
gion, 839; in Renaissance, 523; 
and Rome, 260, 301-2; and ro- 

t, manticism, 702, 709; and Rous- 
seau, 712, 719; and States, 768; 
and Stoics, 263, 287. See al$o 
ethics 

More, Sir Thomas, 533, 534, 535, 

538-43. 544. 5*4 

Morocco, 446 

Mosaic Law, 344, 345, 500 

Moses, 344. 34, 349. 4<>i. 4?5, 5*5 

Motiers, 717 

motion, movement, 46, 75, 82, 88, 
227, 228, 558, 861 ; and Aristotle, 
100, 228-9; and atomists, 84-6, 
88, 89. 92 ; and Descartes, 583-5 ; 
and Heraclitus, 173 . ; and New* 
ton, 89, 230, 560, 585; relativity 
of, Hp, 229. 239, 550, 562; and 
Zcno's argument of the arrow. 

HJ3-4 

multiplication tablr, K4& 
Munich, 491, 526 
murder, 652 
Murray, Gilbert. 30, 36, 37, 3~<;. 

250, 254. 264. 275. 276 
Musacus, 109 

music, 53, 131. 132, 4. 3*5- ?*>*> 
MuftAct, Alfred dc, 779 
Mussolini, Beniio, 746 
Mutiny, Indian. 804 
Mycenaean civilization , 25-6 
Myrtilos, 30 
myvtcrie*, 61. 62, 159, 49*;. *SYr*i/j<> 

Pkrustnian mystrric* ; mytrr> 



m>ttcry rtliftions, 56, 328. 350, 
370, 500 

mytttcd), my%tici*m, 56, 60, 65, 
373* 444. 459. 4#2, 504. 7<>7 
784-6 ; Arab. 446, 448 ; in Diony- 
sus worship and Orphttrn, 32-3- 
37; in prt-Socratic philosophy, 
67; and Hegrl, 757-; w> d 
mathematics, 48, 55. 857; and 
Plato, 126, 148, 158. 159. 195; 



856 



INDEX 



mystic(s), mystici* 



d. 



and Plotinus, 314; and Pytha- 
goras, 48, 5* 59, 148, 236 

Naaman, 576 

names, 68, 148, 167, 176, 179, 185, 

1 86, 22i, 49 x ; and meaning, 68- 

70 

Nantes, 457; Edict of, 627 
Napier, John, 558 f 

Naples, 417, 466, 4745 Kingdom 

of, 516, 520 
Napoleon I (Bonaparte), 413, 528, 

604, 627, 664, 667, 775 ; effect of, 

136, 621, 703, 705, 730, 778^.; 

and German philosophers, 731, 

745. 757, 766, 789, 796, 800; and 

Germany, 658. 747, 765, 810 
Napoleon HI, 664 
Napoleonic wars, 623 
national independence, 530 
national monarchies, 325 
National Socialism, 114, See alto 

Nazis 
nationalism, 501, 504, 624, 664, 

703. 754. 779, 790, 791 ; German, 

252, 745, 779; Jewish, 332; and 

romanticism, 708, 751 
natural law(s), 277, 278, 292, 293. 

647J0 r -. 7*4, 754 land Greeks, 29, 

46,86, 134.277 
natural man, 720 
nature, 227-8, 254, 314* 424* 427; 

law of, 647, 650; state of, 647 j/., 
655, 664 

Nauatphajtes, 264, 265 
Nazis, 117, 383, * 6 59, 798, 817, 

818 

Near East, 120, 328 
Nebuchadrezzar, 44, 329, 342 
nebula, 66, 230 
nebular hypothesis, 732 
necessity, 29, 46, 82, 86, 134, 250, 

a*9. 734, 855 ; and Aristotle, 228 ; 

and Empedodes, 74. 75. 7*; * d 

Plato, 167, i?o 
negation, 734 

Nehemiah, 330, 331, 333. 337. 34 1 
Neopktonism, 241, 274. 301, 320, 

3*7. 499-500, 5*9; and Am- 

montua Saccaa, 311, 34*; 

Afiba* 443. 444* 445. 447; 

Anatoli*. 447, 475. 5i 



Neoplatonism contd. 
Christianity, 319-21, 328, 378, 
421, 426, 438, 499; and Plato, 
165, 323, 509, 521 ; founded by 
Plotinus, 308 # 

Neo-Pythagoreanism, 282, 342 

Nero, 283, 289, 594 

nervous tissue, 68 1, 695 

Nestorianism, 393, 440, 444, 459 

Nestorius, 387-8 

Neuchatel, 717 

New England, 249, 847 

New Jerusalem, 339 

New Testament, 323, 337, 338, 
345, 428, 469, 608, 784, 792, 793 

New Theory of Vision, A (Berke- 
ley), 674 

Newstead Abbey, 775 

Newton, Sir Isaac, 390, 557, 666, 
703, 749, 752, 7535 *nd astrono- 
my, 239; and calculus, 558, 605; 
and Euclid, 55; and God, 585; 
and gravitation, 230, 556, 560; 
and Leibniz, 90, 605; and 
motion, 153, 230, 553; and 
science, 547, 558^.; and space 
and time, 89, 90, 561, 742 

Nicsea, Council of, 349, 353 

Nicene Creed, 349, 353, 4" 

Nicholas I (Saint), Pope, 409, 415- 
17, 418, 423, 424, 501 

Nicholas II, Pope, 433, 434 

Nicholas V, Pope, 411, 519 

Nicholas of Oresme, 498 

Nitomachxxn Ethics (Aristotle) 
183 ft., 195-206, 216 

Nicopolis, 283 , 

Nkbelungen, 463 t 

Niebelungenlied, 386 

Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 61, 
137, 199. 624, 699, 708, 756, 788- 
800; and Byron, 777, 789; and 
Christianity, 197, 788, 792^., 
798, 799; and Darwin, to8; and 
ethics, 788, 792, f95 #. 808; and 
God, 777, 79*-3. 797; nd 
liberalism, 667, 794; *<* Napo- 
leon, 778, 779, 789, 796, 799J 
and Nazism, 798, 818; and 
power, 795. 855; and romapti- 
casm, 746, 75. 788, 789; and 
Sparta, 114, 79i;ndwill t 787, 
788 



897 



2P 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



and 



Nile, aa, 389 

Nilsson, Martin P., as n. 

Nineveh, 43, 329 

Nirvana, 784, 785 

Noah, 488,643 

noble man, 788, 793. 794, 79S 

noble savage, 714 

nominalism, 185, 495, 57* 634, 687 

Nonconformists, 626, 645 

non-Euclidean geometry, 334 

non-resistance, 603 

Normandy, 419, 437 

Normans, 3*6, 415, 417, 49t 

433. 435. 437. 463. 465; 

papacy, 433, 435. 451, 453 
North Africa, 294, 306 
North America, 243, 560, 765 
Northern Italy, 305, 451, 460 
Northumbria, 406 
Norway, 453 
not-being, 88, 91, 425 

nous, 82, 92, 447; and Plotinus, 

312-14* 316, 347 
NotnelU Ml***. La (Rousseau), 

716 

Novalis, 782 
numberfr), 53. 55. i** *68, 175, 

177-9. 8*9-3 . 857-8 
nuns, 396 
Nuremberg, 757 

Gates, W. J., cited, 266 ., 286 it. 

obedience* 397 

object, 676, 810, 824, 836; subject 

and, 600, 837, 840 
objectivity, 8f o 

observation, 53, 58, 87-8, 549, 699 
Occam (or Ockham), William of, 

4W, 49-S, 503. 547 
Occamssts, 534 
Occam's razor, 494 
Ockham, 491 
OcfBviu% See Augustus 
Odo, Saint, 43*? 
Odovmker, 386 
Odyssey, a8 

OeoofMdes of Chios, 236 
Gesterfey and Robinson, 33411., 

350 *. 

Omomaos, 30 
Old Believers, 403 
Old Man of the Mountain* 444 



Old Testament, 351, 373. ?83t 593. 
608, 792; and Christianity, 332- 
3. 347. 361, 33 450, 469. 500; 
and Jewish history, 329 j(f. ; trans- 
lations of, 341-2, 360, 380 

oligarchy, desired by Plato, 127 

Olympian attitude, 38 

Olympian gods, 29, 30. 3*, 39. 42, 
47, 51, 262, 272, 362 n. 

C'ympias, 242 

Olympic Games, 51, 216 

Omar Khayyam, 444 

On Generation and Corruption 
(Aristotle), 85, 88 

On the Heaoent (Aristotle), 226, 
229-30 

On Interpretation (Aristotle), 185 n. 

On the Nature of Thing* (Lucre- 
tius), 271-3 

On the Soul (Aristotle). See De 
Anona 

One, the, 60, 67, 74. 88, 9. 3*t 
3i3.3i4.3i9 

O'Neill, Eugene, 39 

oncological argument, 176, 437-8. 
476, 4*8, 608-9, 710, 711, 735. 
814-15 

opinion, 67-8, I4*~3. 4*. 5. 
165, 168 

opposite*, 60, 62-3, 67, 82, 160, 280 

optimism, 189, 205, 310, 604, 606, 
749, 750, 774, 77, 816; of 
liberalism, 621, 622, 753*4, 774; 
philosophies of, 92, 781. 7*7. 
820. See also cheerfulness; hofft 

oraclc(s), 61, 75, 106, 108, 109, 500 

Orange, Council of, 384 

Orsnge, House of, 582, 592 

Oreatts, 30 

organism, 188, 208, 754. 849 #. 

organizabons and individuals. 664 

OrfOHOfi, 495 

orgy f 4a, $a 

Oriental religions, 41, 262, 328, 499 

Oriental Retigiow m Raman Pagan- 
ism (Cumont), 3oaff M 377 -. 

Oriental view of women, 79* 
Orientals, 241, 763 

3*2, 346-*, 351, 3*1.4*7; 
Augustine, jya, 378. 3a; 
Old Testament, 342; and 
philosophy, 316, 477 



89* 



INDEX 



Origin of Species (Darwin), 808 

Origin of Tyranny, The (Ure), 27 n. 

original gin, 383, 384, 480, 714, 
784 

Orpheus, 35, 37, 41* 47, 109, 304 

Orphism, 35-42, 52, 56, 155, 159, 
272, J50. '499; and Christianity, 
328, 370; and* philosophy, 47, 50, 
52, 56, 08, in, 156, 282, 788; 
and Plato, 126, 141, 159, 184, ^14 

orthodoxy, 100, 848; Christian, 
349, 353, 456, 462, 470, 471, 486, 
487, 50; Jewish, 331, 342; Mo- 
hammedan, 447 

Osiander, Andreas, 548 

Osiris, 22 

Ostrogoths, 386 

Othello, 537 

other world, -Li ness, 51, 126, 141, 

253. ?oH, 3*6, 329 

Otto IV, Emperor, 464-5 

Ottoman Turks, 440 

Ovid, 362 

Owen, Robert, 808, 809 

Oxford University, 461, 483, 486, 
4&9, 401, 538, 628, 6*>7 ; Hobbes 
at, 5<A; WyciiiFe at, 507, 508, 

509 
Ozyirandias, 250 



s, St., 395 
pacifism. 657, 778 
Palermo, 461, 465 
Palestine, 22, 330, 466 
Pan, 32 
Panaetius of Rhodes. *Hi, 282, 295* 

299, 300 

Pangtafts, Doctor, 604 
pantheism, 373. 39O, 421, 426, 477, 

594. 7*3 

papacy, absolutism of, 492, 54~5 ' 
at Avignon* 491 ; and Crusades, 
455 ; <** ars, 395. 4o, 408- 
20; decline. 409-510; and East- 
ern Empire, 4oH~io, 4*6; and 
Empire, 45Ojfif., 765; and Eng- 
hna, s#> 59 powci; of, 325, 
401* 406, 463, 501, 512, 527-8; 
reform of. 432-3; revenues of, 
522-3; and Roman population, 
503; without moral power in* 
fourteenth century, $oa, 504. 
J*f a/to pope 



'899 



Papal States, 516, 519, 526 

Papini, Giovanni, 856 

parabola, 230, 233, 234 

Paradise Lost, 338 

Paraduo (Dante), 230, 309 

Paraguay, 129 

parallelogram law, 555 

Paris, 161, 183, 486, 489, 491, 569, 
605, 686, 713, 781 ; Abllard in, 
45^; Aquinas in, 484-5; Roger 
Bacon in, 486 ; Descartes in, 580, 
581 ; Parlement of, 716 .; Uni- 
versity of, 447, 474-5, 483, 489, 
505 

Parliament, 464, 539, 5&3. 66 3; 
conflict between king and, 569, 
573, 577, 625-6, 627, 662; and 
Hobbes, 569, 570, 573, 577; and 
Locke, 628, 662-3. See also 
Commons ; Long Parliament ; 
Lords 

Parma, 414 

Parmenidcs, 67-71, 82, 87, 89, 112, 
256, 499, 786 ; on change, 67, 68, 
70-1, 88-9; and Hegel, 67, 758, 
769; and logic, 50, 67, 70, 6x8; 
and meaning, 68-71 ; monism of, 
85, 135 ; and Plato, 67, 126, 141- 
3, i?i. 174, 814; and other 
philosophers, 50, 71, 75, 7&, 81, 
82, 84, 87, 88, 90, 3, 5945 and 
theory of ideas, 149-51 

Parmenides (Plato), 112, X49-5* 
184, 258 

Parsifal (Wagner), 788 

Parsons, Robert, 643 

Parthenon, 78 

Parthians, 245 * 

particulars, 149, 15, l86 > "i, 424, 
478-9. See also singulars; uni- 
versals 

Pascal, 546, 718 ., 794. 795 

Paschal II, Pope, 452 

paasion(s), 34, 3^, 39, , 278, 
571-2, 595-7; Ad romanticism, 
703, 708 

Passover, 500 

Patahne movement, 434. 453. 455 

patria poles tas t 301 

Patrutrcha (FUmcr), 642-4 4 

Patrick, St., 386, 396, 406, 4*1 

Paul, St., 154* 160, 283, 323, 344. 
346, 361, 3**. 397, 410, 4". 43* 

* 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Paul, St coitfcf. 
469, 793 ; and St. Augustine, 371, 
381, 383, 385 ; and Dionysius die 
Areopagite, 424, 426; and elec- 
tion. 381, 383* 384; Epistle of, 
383 ; and Judaism, 337, 339 

Paula, St., 361 

Paulicians, 469 

Pausanias, 119 

P*via, 392, 437 

Pavlov, I. P., 802 

Peace, 294-8 

Pearl Harbor, 646 

peasants, 658, 660, 671, 755. 774 

Peasants* Revolt, 508 

Peasants' War, 765 

Peiice, Charles Sanders, 844, 852 

Peisistratus, 28, 79, 529 

IVIagianisfn, 372, 383-5. 4*i 459, 
489.784 

Pelagius, 361. 422-3 

Pelagius II, Pope, 401 

Peloponnesian War, 77, 79, 95. '>, 
103, 125 

Peloponnesus, 83, 114, 119 

Pdops, House of, 30 

Pentateuch, 34L44& 

Pepm, 4*-3. 5*8, 575 

perception, 02, 256, 497, 568, 634, 
681, 783. 81 1 ; and Bergson, 825, 
836, 837; and Berkeky, 673-6; 
and Hume, 686jflT., 604; and 
Kant, 739-46; and Leibniz, 606, 
607, 619; and physics, 743-4. 
861*3; and Plato, 125, 147, 148, 
156, 171-81, 377. 5*8; nd 
Stoics, 281: 292 

Pericles, 77-8o, 81, 9$, 100, 160, 
*7. *87, 306, 797 

peritxci, 115, 11711. 

Peripatetics, 300 

Persephone, 35 

Persia, 31, 48. 7*. 77. 84, 1 18, 207. 
45. 330, 33*. 4*2; and Alex- 
ander, 241, &4*. 243. *45. 302; 
and Arabs, 442, 443. 444* 44; 
and Athens, 99, 119, 393; cul- 

, ture of, 442, 443; dualism of , and 
Christianity, 499, 500; and Mile- 
ts, 46, 47; and Moham 



da 



440, 441, 444! pnc*dy cam n. 
418, 499; religions of, 249, 304. 
44*; rat Rome, 304, 3' 



Persian wars, 32, 77, 78, 99-ico 

Peru, 22, 644 

pessimism, 252, 781, 783, 786-7 

Petelia tablet, 36 

Peter, St., 344. 404. 4io, 4". 467 

Peter III, of Aragon, 520 

Petition of Right, 569 

Petrarch, 504, 505, 516, 521 

Pfleiderer, Edmund, 61 

P:3aedo (Plato), 109, 112, 154-64, 
312, 462, 597 

Phaedrus (Plato), 81 

Pharaohs, 242 

Pharisees, 338. 339, 340, 34 

Pheidias, 78, 81, 95* 1O * 287 

phenomenon, 739 

Philhellencs, 305 

Philip II, of Maccdon, 182, 241, 
242, 244, 206 

Philip II, of Spain, 577 

Philip IV (the Fair), 503 

Philippi, 297 

Philo Judaeu, 342, 346 

Philolaus of Thebes, 236 

philosopher^), 3. 3. 34. 4O, 45. 
7. 53. 54, 208, 226, 377. 
378; Aristotle on, 203, 205; and 
class interests, 210; and indivi- 
dual circumstances, 284 ; modern, 
and deduction, 222; modern, 
and ethics, 201; Plato on, i*y, 
I34> n7 ff'. 142; nd political 
and social developments, 620 ff. ; 
Pythagoras on, 51, 139; Socrates 
on, 107, 158, 162-3; sympathy 
toward, 58; and time, 66 

philosopher's stone, 62 

/hMtoopfof, 274. 629 666, 6X6, 716, 
792 

Philosophical Radicals, 666, 703. 
746, 750~i, 753. oi t 803, 807-8 

philosophy, *ies: and Arabs, 306; 
and Aristotle, 182, 222, 223; in 
Athens, 78-9, 80, too; begun 
with Thales, at, 43; classifica- 
tion of, 819-20; consists of two 
pans,* 863; ttamcmplatjve ideal 
in, 53; cosmopolitan point of 
view m t 143; and dark ages, 322; 
and carry Christianity, 329; hun- 
ger and, 774; invented by 
Greeks, 21; among Jews and 
Mohammedan, in Middle Ages, 



900 



INDEX 



philospohy, -ies contd. 
344; lacked by opposition to 
Church in Middle Ages, 323; of 
logical analysis, 857-64; and 
Marx, 810-1 x ; and mathematics, 
48, 55, S^; mind and matter in, 
156; dpen*que*tions in, 139; and 
Plato, 98-9, 1x3; of power, 5x4; 
religious, 37, 47, 5& and Renais- 
sance, 525; and seventeen<fi- 
century science, 558^.; and 
social circumstances, 284 ; stand- 
ard of judgment of, 308-9; and 
substance, 71; as way of life, 
42,98 

Phocaea, 249 

Phocas, Emperor, 405 

Phoenicians, 26, 27, 28, 243, 261, 

3<>3 

Photius, Patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, 416 

physical law, 684 

physicalist interpretation, 681 

phystco-theological argument, 608, 
611-12, 736 

physics, 630, 682, 714, 741-2; and 
Aristotle, 226-9, 537; causal 
laws in. 695; and Descartes, 
584. 586, 590; and Greek philo- 
sophers. 53, 66, 246, 276, 281, 

558; and Newton, 558-9; and 
perception, 619, 743-4, 861 ; and 
philosophy of logical analysis, 
860-2; in seventeenth century, 
580 ; and substance, 7 1 , 687 ; and 
modern science, 90-1, 547, 561- 



Physic* (Aristotle), 89, 226-30 

physiology, 695, 802, 86 1 

Piedmont, 470 

Pieiro dells Vigna, 4**, 4*7 

Pilate, Pontius, 341 

Pillars of Hercules, 165 

Piltdown Man, 753 

a, 454* 465, 5<>5 

nwfau, 753 



place, aaa, 689, 694 

Plague, 570 

planets, 498, 561, 58$, 732 ; ancient 
views about, 152-3. 166, 130, 
23$-8, 55; and Kepler, 234f 
55*, 557; and Tycho Brahc, 55 

Plataea, 31, 118, 119 



Plato, 37, 104, 242, 258, 305, 537, 
715, 8x4, 820; and after-life, 
272; and ancient philosophers, 
73, 78, 81, 83, 85, 86, 97, 253, 
267, 280, 282, 287; and Aquinas, 
474, 478, 484; and Arabs, 443, 
445 ; and Aristotle, 80, 93, 184-5, 
187, x88, 192, 194, 195, 2X0-1 x, 
218, 241; and astronomy, 237, 
552 ; and Athens, 78, 80, 99 ; and 
Boethius, 389, 390; and cave, 76, 
145, 147-8; and Christianity, 
I2i, 307-8, 323, 329. 346, 499; 
cosmogony of, 165-70; and de- 
duction, 55-6, 222; and Des- 
cartes, 580, 590; and dialectic, 
x 12 ; and Doctors of the Church, 
309, 370, 372, 376, 377, 378, 379, 
438; dualism of, 323, 590; and 
Erasmus, 534, 537; ethics of, 
195; and existence, 860; and 
Gnosticism, 315, 344, 7x7, 863; 
and God, 55, 373, 478, 484, 608; 
and Heraditus, 63-4, 74; and 
immortality, 154-64, 194, 258, 
317, 350, 6xx, 863; influence of, 
141, 165, 171, 2x8, 24X, 307, 323, 
438-9, 499, 529; and justice, 
205 ; and Kepler, 551 ; and know- 
ledge, x 12, 171-81, 292, 320, 497, 
521 , 547, 633 ; knowledge of, 439, 
474, 5<>9; and logic, 2x8, 6x8; 
and love, xxx, 122; and mathe- 
matics, 54-5, 153, 231, 232, 234, 
237, 313, 848, 857, 860; and 
modern philosophers, 141, 571, 
633. 762, 781, 7*9, 814; and 
Orphism, 37, 184; and othor- 
worldltness, 3x7, 329; and Par- 
menides, 67, 141-2; and per- 
ception, 171-81, 256, 497, 568; 
and Philo, 342; and pleasure, 
202; and Plotinus, 3x0-13, 3x7, 
593; and pohtics, 114^*25, 199, 
247, 253, 530? 576, 622; and 
Pythagoras, 50, 56, 83, 141 ; and 
religion, 34, 192 ; and Rome, 259, 
300 ; and scholastic philosophers, 
424. 425, 438-9, 449, 456, 459, 
460, 461, 484, 488, 489, 4901496; 
and science, 558; and Socrates, 

' 78, 82, 102-4, HI, 112, 132, 1^4, 

I 258, 259, 484; and Sophists, $6, 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Plato COrtd. 

98-9; and soul, 195, 310, 346; 
sources of opinions of, 125-8; 
and Sparta, 114, 118, 120; and 
Stoics, 275, 276, 280; and sub- 
jectivity, 320; and time, 229; 
vices in thought of, 93, 98-9 ; and 
virtue, in, 199, 320, 596, 863; 
and Wyclifle, 507. See also theory 
of ideas 

Piatonopolis, 311 

Pbutus, 362 

pleasure and pain, 33, 156-7, 202, 
287, 39p, 669, 749, 803-4, 829; 
and Aristotle, 202-3; and Ben- 
tham, 802, 803-5 ; and Berkeley, 
675, 679; *nd Epicurus, 266-8; 
and Locke, 638, 640-1, 669; and 
utilitarians, 803-6 

plenum, 88, 89 

Pletho, Gemistus, 521 

Pttny, the Elder, 537 

Ptotinus, 308-21, 344, 34*. 377, 
390, 424, 426, 438, 443, 762; 
originality of, 451 ; pagan philo- 
sophy ends with, 499 i *nd Plato, 

593 

pluralism, 85, 152, 618 

plurality, 734, 830, 858 

Plutarch, 114, 116, 120, 121-4, 238, 
260-1, 713, 721, 793 

plutocracy, plutocrat, 52, 95* 644 

poets, 64-5, 72, 131, 136 

pogroms, 343, 387, 452 

Poland, 659 

politics, 108, 114, 125, 126-7, 138, 
247, 593. 62* Jf., 730, 818; Arab. 
4*42; and Aristotle, 199. 200. 203, 
204, 207-17; and Bentham, 803, 
804, 805, 808; and Christianity, 
322, 348-9, 351-2. 353, 428, 430- 
i; and Darwin, 754, 808; and 
Dcwey, *47; d ethic*. 109. 
200, 261, 20^ 807, 863; and 
Euclid, 55; ana evolution, 532; 
and Greeks, 72* 99. 120-1, 247. 
252. 253, 299* 53o; and Locke, 
629, 642-65; and Machiavetti, 
5*5-3*. 79; nd MaisigBo of 
Padua, 491*3; * Mr*. 810, 
*l 3, *5 ; and Middle Ages, 419, 
463; modern, 52, 326, 747, 817- 
'18; and NietBsche, 7*9, 796, 



903 



politics contd. 

798; and Occam, 493-4; and 
romanticism, 701* 707 and 
Rome, 273. 299, 530; and Rous- 
seau, 711, 721-7 

Polities (Aristotle), 45, 119, 207-17 

Polo, Marco, 704 ' ' 

Polybius, 282, 295. 299 

Polycrates, 48 

polygamy, 393, 443 

polytheism, 22, 249 

poor, 199, 248, 349, 357. 655, 701- 
2, 774. 793 

Poor Men of Lyons, 469, 471 

Pope, Alexander. 280, 390, 560, 
702, 780 

popc(), 323. 3^8, 303. 394, 39^, 
501 #, S3 8 ', <* emperor, ,323, 
382, 412-13. 428, 432-6, 450, 
464 jff., 491 ff. ; and philosophers, 

461, 482, 486, 491. 492, 493* 536, 
548, 576; power of, 349-50. 493. 
522, $32, 544, 643 ; and Reforma- 
tion, 544, 545 ; and Renaissance, 
518-19. 523; and Roman popu- 
lation, 429. 437. S**al*u papacy 

; Pope Joan, 418 

\ population, theory- of, 751, 753. 

! 808 

i Porphyry, 221. 222, 310, 320, 37S. 

4*8, 495. 499 

i Portugal, 388, 463, 592 
I Porree, Gilbert de la. 460 
; Poaidonius, 239, 281-2, 300. 320 
) Posterior Analytic* (Aristotle), 223. 

462, 476 

; pm-crty, 92 ., 208, 397, 469-70. 

471. 4*2,491.765,785 

power, 216, 348, 529. 603. 6oK, 
643, 644. 746, 755A 854; and 
Kpicurus, 267; and ethics. 137, 
661-2; and Locke, 639, 654; 
love of, no, 157, 153, 775; and 
Machiavelli, 531 ; and modem 
Stato, 514. 56, 577-8. 754. 855; 
and Niettache, 794*. tnd philo- 
ophy, 253, 514, 855-6; in Plato's 
Utopia. 135; political, 520, 522. 
653-4. 664, 818; social 514. 
855-6; and Socmtea, 103; and 

* Thnuymschu*, 09 

Amr (Ruaaeli). 813 

practical philosophies, 819 



INDEX 



pragmatism, 173. 820, 839, 842; 
3, 844 jfr. 
(Bntmut), 



, . 

and truth, 52, 97, 573, 844 jfr. 
The 



Praise of Folly, 

535-6 
predestination, 382, 423, 482, 545, 

546 

predicates, 211, 733 
premises, 21 ft., It 19, 292 
Presbyterians, 493, 625, 626 
pre-Socratics, 2iff. t 64, 92, 126, 

165, 788 

pressure groups. 352 
pride, 560, 777. 856 
Pride's Purge, 626 
priest(s), priesthood, 41, 483. 499, 

500, 507, 508, 545- See also clergy 
Priestley, Joseph, 802 
primary qualities, 629-30, 676, 677, 

680, 739 
Primitive Culture in Greece (Rose), 

3011. 

primogeniture, 646 
Prince, The (Machiavelli), 526-30, 

789 

Prtndpia (Newton), 55, 558, 585 
Principia Mathematica (Whitehead 

and Russell), 859 
principle of individuation, 489-90, 

783 
Principle* of Human Knowledge, 

The (Berkeley). 674 
/Vi*r Analytic*, The (Aristotle), 

122, 462 

private interests, 638, 803 
jfnvate judgment, 493 
probability, a6i, 689, 696, 699, 843 
process, 65, 66, 848 
Prtxlus, 232, 439 
progress, 22, 57, 64, 309, 418, 428, 

57a, 754, 816 
projectiles, 554 
Probfomtna to the Study of Greek 

Religion (Harrison), 32 w., 40 
proletariat, 285, 383, 702, 709, 754. 

774, 817 

Prometheus, 39, *55 338 
propaganda, 137, 138, 139, *i7 

350. 53L 755 
property, 34, 51, 135, 196, 21 1, 507, 

511, 621, 803, 809; and Hobbea, 

573, 575; and Locke, 639, 651, 

654, 656 j(f., 664, 724; and Plato, 

>3* *33 ; and Rousseau, 714, 7*4 

I 



Prophet, 306, 440, 441, 443. See 
also Mohammed 

prophets, 330-3, 342, 345, 348, 350 

proportion, 233, 234, 689 

Protagoras, 84, 94-101, 139, 246, 
320, 374; on knowledge and per- 
ception, 171, 172, 173, 256; on 
roan, 173, 179-80; and subjectiv- 
ism, 256 

Protagoras (Plato), 78, 97 

protestants, -ism, 352, 520, 538, 
545, 582, 645, 728, 757, 839-40; 
and St. Augustine, 354, 364, 382; 
and Erasmus, 533, 538; in Ger- 
many, 747-8, 765 ; and God, 608, 
717; and individualism, 545, 
622; and interest, 210; and 
liberalism, 620; and private 
judgment, 493; and prudence, 
638; and right of subjects to 
resist, 642; and romanticism, 
705; and Rousseau, 712, 716, 
717; and science, 551, 556; and 
soul, 366; and State, 582, 766, 
769; and Vulgate, 535; and 
Wyclifle, 509 

protons, 66 

protozoa, 557 

Provence, 4 1 7, 448 

prudence, 33, 267, 271, 638, 640, 
703.806 

Prussia, 301, 613, 658, 727, 747~8, 
757. 762, 765, 766, 781 

pseudo-Dionysius, 424, 426, 427, 

439,489 

psychology, 71, 570, 593, 595, 658, 
706-7, 86 1 ; and Bentham, 8oa, 
805; and causality, 692-3, 695; 
and Hume, 687, 692-3; and 
James, 839; and substance, 71, 
687 

Ptolemaic astronomy, 218, 239, 550 
Ptolemies, 246, 333, 708 
Ptolemy I (Soter), 292 
Ptolemy II (Philaflblphus), 380 
! Ptolemy, geographer, 239, 537, 55*, 

! 571 

1 public good, 655, 656 
public interests, 638, 802, 805 
Punic Wars, 272, 294, *99, 3ir4i9 



Pure Being, 760, 762 
purgatory, 429, 5", 535, 545 



903 



Puritans, -ism, 141, 359"., 455* 

504, 5*8, 577, 648 
purpose, 74, 7*. 86, 92, 170, 559; 

snd Aristotle, 93, 205, 208, 228 
pyramids, 22, 161, 214, 231 
Pynho, 256-7 
Pythagoras, 47, 48-5*, 67, 7*. 75, 

76,82, 313, 390; and 



, 552; and Heraclitus, 58, 59, 
60; influence of, 56, 499; and 
mathematics, 67, 232, 848, 857, 
860; and mysticism, 37, 59; and 
Nietzsche, 788; and Plato, 126, 
139. Hi, 148; and soul, 163, 192. 
See also Neo-Pythagoreanism; 
Pythagoreans) 

Pythagoreans, -ism, 49-50, 59, 83, 
153, 165, 169, 857; and astron- 
omy, 153, 236, 237, 548, 55i; 
and mathematics, 158, 169, 232; 
and Plato, 226, 165, 166, 181; 
and Ptotinus, 311; and politics, 
247, 253; and soul, 223 

Pythocles, 267 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 

, 35, 39, 5i, 62, in, 159 reason, 33, 56, 65, 289, 313, 337, 

571, 718 fi., 815; and Aquinas, 
476, 482, 484 ; nd Aristotle, 194, 
195, 203; and Averroes, 447, 
474*5; *nd Bentham, 804; and 
Catholic philosophy, 3*4, 348, 
43. 437, 438, 456, 459, 46i, 564; 
and Hegel, 761, 763, 767. 832; 
and Kant, 732, 736; and Locke, 
4631* 636, 649; and Plato, 145, 
155. '65; and revolt, 75 818; 
and Rousseau, 720, 729; suffi- 
cient, law of, 615 

recurrence, 278 

reflection, 174, 310 

reform, 533, 670, 780; ecclesi- 
astical, 409, 428-39, 45*, 464 

Reformation, 325, 413, 420, 531, 
544-6; and St. Augustine; 354, 
366, 382; economic changes in, 
210; and Erasmus, 536, 538; 
foreshadowed, 455, 468, 470, 
49*-3> 508-9; and Germany, 
747, 764-5 ; and politic*. 577, 
643 ; as reaction to corruption in 
Church, 522, 532; and Renais- 
sance, 513. 520, 533, 855; and 
State, 354, 382, 766 

refugees, 31. 44, 72, 325. 422, 569 

refutations, 71, 226 

regular solids, 169, 170, 234. 55 

Reichstag fire, 526 

Reign of Terror, 731, 738 

relation-words, 186 

relational propositions, 172 

relativity. See motion; theory of 
relativity 

religion(s), 23, 33, 56, 64, 138, 316, 
342, 499* 536, 7<>7; nd ancient 
philosophy, 40, 61, 67, 75. 83, 
92, 98, 269, 271-3. 275; *nd 
Aquinas, 474; and Aristotle, 184, 
192, 206; of the East, 41, 311; 
and Francis Bacon, 564; in 
Greek world, 24-5, 29, 32-3. 4O- 
2, 47, 80, 241, 250, 275 i of India, 
241 ; in Ionia, 47, 67; of Jews, 
328-43 ; and John the Scot, 423 ; 
and Machiavelli, 527 ; and medi- 
eval philosophy, 439; Moham- 
medan, 441 ; and Nietzsche, 788, 
790; non-Hellenic, in Western 
Empire, 302-3, 35; and Plato, 



Quakers, 382, 602 
quality, 222, 689, 734. 772-3 
quantity, 47, 222, 734 
quantum theory, 90, 173 it., 
630, 695, 861 



561, 



.709 

Radcliffe, Mrs., 705 

Radicalism, 801 

radio-activity, 66 

rainbow, 486,593 

Ranke, Leopold von, 517 

rationalism, 569, 571 , 698, 746, 75 , 
758, 8 jo, 819; in Greek world, 
33. 39* 40, 4^, 50, 55, S^, 59. 83, 
84, 247; and science, 61, 729 

Ravenna, 393, 402, 403, 409, 4o 

Raymond, Abp. of Toledo, 461 

Raymond VI, tfount of Toulouse, 
464 

realism, 185, 424, 459, 489, 504* 

. 819, 825 

wdiry, 87, 158, 734, 836, 844, M; 
ami Hegel, 758-9, 761, 769-70, 
851; and Plato, 126, 141, 147, 
148, 156, i8, 188; and Phtonk 

theory of ideas, 143, 5O, 15* 



904* 



INDEX 



religion(s) contd. 

125, 192, 195; and Plotinus, 311, 
499; primitive, 29; and Py- 
thagoras, 49-50, 53, 56; and 
Socrates, 107-11, 157, 313; wars 
of, 544, 545. 621, 702 

Religion* and the Rise of Capitalism 
(Tawney), 20^), 647 n. 

religious toleration, 441, 542, 545, 
620, 630 

reminiscence, 112, 125, 161, 102, 
163. See also memory 

Remus, 351 

Renaissance, 121, 217, 218, 262, 
307, 410-20, 448, 513, 516, 747; 
and Catholic philosophy, 322, 
348; and Church, 411, 516, 533; 
disrupts medieval synthesis, 325 ; 
aifd geometry, 235 ; and Greeks, 
57; happiness of, 285, 326; and 
human pride, 855; and Lucre- 
tius, 271, 273; and Nietzsche, 
789; in north, 533 ,/f.; and 
philosophy, 93, 49$; and Plato, 
320, 439, 474; nd politics, 525 ; 
and science, 87, 537 

Renaissance in Italy (Burckhardt), 
522 ., 523 ii. 

Republic (Plato), 99, 120, 125, 120- 

53. 165, 95. 272, 311, 539. 622; 

influence of, 141; parable of 

*cave in, 145, 147-8; theory of 

ideas in, 141 ff. 

republicanism, republics, 526, 529, 

* 531.738,750 

Restoration : English, 570, 577, 626, 
631, 654; French, 664, 705 

resurrection, 332, 339, 347, 35, 
376, 3t, 401, 469, 482, 483 

retaliation, 650, 651, 652 

revelation, 41, 5. 4*3, 447, 44**, 
47S 5*4* 631, 719; and Aquinas, 
476, 48*. 44* 485 

Revelation of St. John, 382 

wvenge, 324, 329 

revival of learning, 307, 397 

revolt, 740, 774. 819 

revolution(s), 213-14, 383, 658, 
848; of 1688, 628. 642, 663; of 
1848.782,811 

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 273 i 

Rhetras, 423, 457 

Rhine, 294 

905 



Rhode Island, 674 
Rjcardo, David, 660, 661, 667, 808 
Richard I of England, 455 
Richard II of England, 508, 509 
Richard, King of the Visigoths, 

404,405 

Richelieu, cardinal, 577 
Rienzi, Cola di, 504-5 
rights, 55, 530, 573, 575, 57$, 651, 

652, 657, 721-2; of man, 648, 

653. 7, 731, 738, 750. 803 
Rimmon, 576 

roads, 443 

Robespierre, 718, 727, 75<> 
Roderic, Count of Maine, 413 
Roland, Madame, 703 
Roman conquests, 245, 272 
Roman Empire, 281, 291, 308, 341, 
412, 442, 500, 574, 766 ; ends an- 
archy, 514-15; and Christianity, 
80, 241, 324, 328, 346, 500; and 
culture, 294-307, 389; tall of, 
363, 705; and Greek world, 241, 
299-307; memory of, in Middle 
Ages, 451,452, 4^7 
Roman law, 389, 393, 406, 450, 

452, 466 
Roman republic, 270, 273, 450, 

529, 849 

Roman roads, 443 

Roman tradition, and Church, 322, 
395, 409, 4*> 

Romans, Epistle to the, 384, 489 

romantic movement, romanticism, 
514, 670, 701-10, 745. 782, 804, 
810; in Germany, 121, 730, 752; 
and industrialism, 754-5; and 
Man, 810, 811; and Nietzsche, 
788, 789; and revolt, 703. 746, 
751-2; and Rousseau, 623, 711 

Rome, 240, 285, 310, 360-1, 369, 
396-8, 414, 457, 547 *, nd Africa, 
440; and St. Ambrose, 355, 356; 
and Arnold of Brescia* 45 3; and 
Attila, 388; Macked by Bar- 
barossa, 452 ; bishop of, 402; and 
Byzantines, 394. 49', Carneades 
in, 259, 260, 261 ; and Charle- 
magne, 411; and Christianity, 
298, 321 ; civilization of, 285,; un- 
der Cola di Rienzi, 504; and 
culture, 217, 406; and Donation 
of Constantine, 411-12; East 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Rome contd. 

and, 301-4, 417-18; economic 
system of , 285 ; Emperor marches 
on, 504; and Euclid, 234; fall of, 
246, 419, 4.63 ; German emperors 
crowned in, 412; and Great 
Schism, 505; and Gregory the 
Great, 401-2 ; Henry IV in, 437 ; 
and Greece, 26, 301-4, 763 ; and 
Hellenic world, 240; influence 
of, 120, 747; and Irish culture, 
422; and Jews, 335. 34*; nd 
Jubilee, 502; in Justinian's wars, 
393-4; and Lampsacus, 249; and 
Lombards, 409, 450; manners 
in, 259; and Milan, 434; and 
Monasticism, 396, 430; and 
papacy, 408, 409. 4i7 429* 
432 ff., 45jfl r - 5>i-2, 522; and 
politics, 248, 253, 529, 576-7; in 
Renaissance, 522, 529-30; ruled 
by Counts of Tusculum, 432; 
acked, 326, 354, 358, 363, 
375-6, 387, 437, 520. 526; 
and Saracens, 415; in seventh 
century, 409; State religion of, 
284, 298; and Stoicism, 253, 275, 
281, 282-93; in tenth century, 
417-18; and Venice, 517. See 
QUO Roman Empire \ Roman 
republic 

Romuald, St., 432, 434 

Romulus, 351, 525 

Rooaeveh, F. D., 711. 846 

Roacelin, 437, 439, 457, 459, 461 

Rose, H, J., 30, 32 it. 

Rosen, Edward. 548 n. 

RcftovstefT, M, 28 ., 43 ., 285-6, 
296, 298 ., 304, 352 

Rotrud, daughter of Charlemagne, 

413 

Rotterdam, 533 

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 255. 536, 
666, 701, 711-^7. 748, 764. 779- J 
80, 8 1 8, 842; *.d St. Augustine, 
364; and Condorcet, 748, 749; 
and excitement, 703 ; and French 
Revolution, 748; and God, 608, 
'717-18; and Hume, 686, 69*-?, 
6, 717 ; and individualism* 623 ; 
atiam of, 698; and Kant, j 



73i. 738-9; and liberalism, 667; 
and MachiaveUt, 531*., 725; 



Rousseau -cantd. 
and Nazism and Fascism, 818; 
and Nietzsche, 789, 791; and 
noble savage, 714; and politics, 
71 1, 721 ff. ; and religion, 7i6jjf. ; 
and revolutionaries, 629, 726; 
and romanticism, 70*, 703, 704, 
711; and sensibility, 702, 710, 
712; and social contract, 573, 
^16, 721 #; and Sparta, 114, 
713, 721; and State, 7*1. 7*3. 
724, 725. 726, 766; and sub- 
jectivism, 514; and will, 787 

Rudolf, Duke of Swabia, 436-7 

Rudolf II, Emperor 551 

Rufinus, Tyrannius, 361 

Rumania, 659 

Russell, Demand, 211, 491* &oi ., 
813. 854-5. 859 

Russia, 183, 403, 577, 646, 659, 
671, 672, 73 i. 746, 848; educa- 
tion in, 755; Marxism in, 817; 
military strength of, 419; new 
society in, 532; rationalist revolt 
in, 75 1 ; Rousseau and dictator- 
ship in, 727; State in, in 1917, 
578. See alto South Ku*ia; 
Soviet Russia; U.S.S.R. 

Russian anarchists, 751 

Russian Revolution, 659, 671 

Rutbcus, Quintus Junius, iHS 

Rutilianus, 303 * 

Sabbath, 139. 33*. 337 

Stbellum heresy, 353 

Sabellius, 353 

Sacrament**), 37. 4, 4*9. 4,1 5 - 4**2, 

483 

Sacred Book, 351, 500 
sacrifice, 29, 32, 272, 332, x>* 
Sadductcs, 335, 338 
aaim(*), 50, in, 137, 164. n>7, 276, 

378, 382, 396, 531, 794. 7V* 
St. Denis, 424, 45 
St. Gildas, 458 

Saint-Lambert, Marquis tic, 718 
SL Sophia, 393 
SsJanus, 31, too 
Sallust, 363 

salvmtiofi, 36, 37. 253, 262, 333, 
546, 600, 799. 820; and St. 

Augustine. 370, 382, 384, 385; 

and Christianity, 328, 366; and 



906 



INDEX 



salvation contd. 

St. Paul, 346; and Rousseau, 

714, 719 
Salzburg, 414 
Samarcand, 241 
Samaria, 335 
Samos, 48-9^245. 264 
Samuel, 323, 359 n., 450, 461 
Santa Claus, 845 
Santayana, George, 226, 839, 840, 

855 f 

Saracens, 394. 4X5. 417, 419. 4*8 
Sardes, 48 
Sardinia, 402-3 
Sargon 1, 250 
Sarmatians, 363 
Sarpi, Paolo, 5x7 
Saun, 157, 378, 380, 385, 395. 4<x>, 

49 J, 500, 786; and Ahriman, 499 
Satanism. 775. 777, 779 
Satyric drama, no 
Saul, 323, 450 

savage(s), 33. 33. 7U, 7*5. 72O 
Savonarola, Girolamo, 509, 518, 

5*3. 5^5 

Savoy, 711 

Saxons, 401, 412, 421, 436 

Scandinavia, 470, 545 

Scandinavian invasions, 421, 428 

acrpucmm, 97, 246, 593, 732, 760, 

K*5. 846; n Greece and Home, 

*77, 93. 9*. 241, 252-3, 256-62, 

206, 299, 342; and Hume, 689, 

M, 697, 699 

Shelling, Phedrich Wilhclm Jo- 
seph von, 73<> 745 

Schiller, P. C., 97, 173 n,, 820, 844 

schiism, 550. Stf alto Great Schism 

Schlcgel, Friedhch, 782 

Schmeidkr, 458 

ftcholastictsm, 564, 566, 605; and 
Arabs. 307, 447-8; and Aristotle, 
187, 210, 219, 235, 439", and 
Church, 326-7, 813; and Des- 
cartes, 580, 589, 591, 690; and 
Krnsmus, 533, 534, 536; and free 
will, 235 ; and God, 608; growth 
of, 428, 439. 447. 45<>~. 45-*a; 
and Hildcbnind, 327 ; and labour 
theory of value, 660; and Locke, 
628, 633, 648; and logic, 219.*, 
513; at Oxford, 507, 568; and j 
Ptatoftism, 438; and realism, i 



scholasticism contd. 
424; and Renaissance, 322, 516, 

Schopenhauer, Arthur, 699, 746, 



science, 41, 53, 62, 79, 137, 139, 
547, 690, 704, 854, 862; in 
Alexandria, 80, 246; and Aris- 
totle, 86, 93, 182, 225, 226, 227; 
and St Augustine, 368; and 
Babylonia, 23-4; and Francis 
Bacon, 563, 564, 565, 566; and 
Roger Bacon, 486, 488; and 
Bergson, 826, 831; and causa- 
tion, 689; and civilization, 34, 
419-20; and Descartes, 580, 581, 
583, 59o; and Dewey, 844, 854- 
5; and economics, 160, 752; and 
empiricism, na, 567, 729, 857, 
862; and Epicurus,, 270; and 
ethics, 204, 807; and flux, 64, 
65-6; and geometry, 55, 57-8; 
and Greeks. 21, 29, 31, 41, 43, 
5 1 , 58, 241 , 243, 320 ; and Hume, 
689, 696; and induction, 699; 
and instruments, 557 ; and James, 
839; and Kant, 731, 73*. 748; 
and knowledge, 87, 862; and 
liberalism, 621, 817; and Machi- 
avelli, 525, 531; and Marx, 810, 
811, 816, 818; and mind and 
matter, 156; modern, 85, 512, 
513; in nineteenth century, 746, 
752; and Occam, 495, 497; and 
optimism, 787; and philosophy, 
512-13, 749, 815, 862; and 
Plato, 79, 136, if 8; and pre- 
Socratics.43.44-7, 61, 7^-4. 7, 
81, 83, 84#, 92; and purpose, 
86, 92; and Pythagoreanism, 51, 
72; and Renaissance, 87, 516, 
537; and Rousseau, 714; and 
scepticism, 257, 259; and schol- 
asticism, 456; of seventeenth 
century, 512, $57, 547-6*, 746, 
752; and Socrates, 105, in, 158, 
164; and Spinoza, 593, 601 ; and 
Stoics, 281, 282, 292; and 
technique, 217, 5*4, 754*, arid 
truth, 623, 696, 864. See. also 
empiricism 

Scipio ("the Elder"), 376 
Scipio ("the Younger"), 281, 2091 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



53 T 

Scotland, 406, 489, 505, 645; 

Chinch of, 645 
Scott, Michael, 447 
script, 25, 27. Set also writing 
Scriptures, 341-2, 348, 372, 380, 

385..458, 482, 487, 49*, S. 550 

Sebastian, St., o33 

Second Coining, 383, 8x8 
secondary qualities, 629-30, 676, 

68o,739 

security, 530, 803 
Seeliger, Dr. Gerhard, 413 
Seleucia, 245 

Seleucids, 244* 249* 281, 333 
Seleucus, Greek astronomer, 238, 

MS 

Seleucus I (Nkator), 244. 245 
self, 3*1. 688, 708, 729; -assertion, 
77$ ; consciousness, 761 ; -devel- 
opment. 707; -government, 208; 
-interest, 637-8, 672, 707. 7*4; 
murder, 51; realization, 710; 
torture, 785 

Semele, 35 

semi-Pelagian heresy, 384 

Semites, 22 

Senate (Rome), 260, 295-7, 303, 

35. 3j9.4H, 5*9 
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, 250, 275, 

277. *79, 82, 368, 300, 487 
Sens, 45^ 
sensation, 169, 634, 636, 676. 734. 

740, 812 
ense(s), 53. 50. 67, 256, 310, 675, 

728; -perception, 88, 92. 145. 

162, 760; aqd Plato. 93, 126, 142, 
,145, 146, 156, 172, 174. t76; 

and Socrates, 157. 162; and 

Stoics, 276, 202 
sensibility, 701, 710, 712 
sensible world, 126, 300, 314-16, 

3*9. 378 

Septuagtnt, 341-**, 360, 3^0 
serfdom, 22, 27, 1 14, 298, 658, 672, 

747 

Setgius II. Pope, 418 
Sfertnon on the Mount, 154. 339 
serpent, 344 
ma, c$6 

Seven Wise Men of Gnsecr, 44 
8ran Years' War, 731 



Seville, 402, 446 

, 73. 9*. *68, 345. 35 . 379, 4*6, 
469,481 

Sextos Empiricus, 238, 262, 288 

Sforza, 516-17 

Shaftesbury, ist Earl of, 628 

Shahnama (Fiidousi),444* 

Shakespeare, 50*.; 64-5. 196, 537, 
544. 55*. 749. 795. 838 

Shanghai, 243, 456 

Shaw, George Bernard, 819 

Shelley, Mary WoUstonecraft, 70$ 

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 91. *5*. *7L 
667, 705. 776, 838 

Sheol.338.339 

Shendan, R. B., 705 

Shiah, 442 

Shinto ideology , 419 

ship-money, 662 

Slam, 632 

Sibyl, 6 1 

Sicilian Vespers, 520 

Sicily: and Emperor Frederick II, 
463, 465, 466; and Greeks, 26, 
27, 41. 49 . 67, 7*. 74* 77. oo, 
139; and Lombard League, 454; 
and Mohammedan*. 307, 440; 
and Naples, 520; and Normans, 
326, 417, 419, 4*8. 463. 464; and 
papacy, 463; and Saracens. 41$, 
4*9. 4*8 

Sidney, Algernon, 749 

Sidon, 243 

Siegfried, 788 

Sigwart, 74* 

Stlenu*, 110 

atlver, 132, tjj 

Simeon Stylitcs, St., 396 

Simon de Mention, 464 

simony. 401. 4<H, 43O-I, 43*. 433. 
434 

simple life, 255 

, 339. 3*5-6. 375. 39. 4**. 560. 
5&4* 613; and St. Augustine, 
364-7. 369. J7, 34J nd 
Gfteks. 39. 5. 75"*. 3*6, 319; 
and Jews, 338, 339, 365-6; ** 
John the Scot, 4*5-6; of priests, 
4*3; and Sptnuta. 504- ^ ***> 
onginal sin 

Smgaoonj, 143 

stngukrt, 478-9 

Sinopc, 254 



908 



INDEX 



slave morality, 792 

alavery, 34, 43. 5, 9 w, 130, 248, 
254, 260, 334, 405, 443; and 
Aristotle 196, 197, 205, 208-9, 
211, 214, 215; slid Epictetus, 
286 287; in 0x^606,27,94,217; 
in Rome,85, 293, 295, 302 

Slavs. 403, 811* 

Smith, Sydney, 211 

Smollett, Tobias George, 704 

Smuts, J. C., 771 * 

social behaviour, 707, 709-10 

social causation, 813 

social circumstances, social en- 
vironment, 284, 322, 621, 815- 
16, 854-5 

social cohesion, 247 

social contract, 267, 572, 648, 650, 
6&#. 664 

Social Contract, Th* (Rousseau), 
716, 721-7 

Social Democratic Party, 817 

social organiiation(s) v 524, 769 

social power, 514, 855 

social revolution, 811 

social science, 805 

ocial sy*tem(s). 27-8, 52, 200, 442, 
5*4 543. 814 

socialism, 511, 658, 661, 709, 754, 
808, 810; in England, 508, 751, 

, 801, 807, 808-9. 817; and Man, 
383, 810, 8t6; and Nietzsche, 

791,703, 794 

society, 252. 253. 709-10, 848 

Socrates, 78, 81, 99. too, 102-13, 
144, too, 161, 171-2. 247, ao6; 
and Aristophanes, 77, too; and 
Boethius. 390; character of, 109- 
" 54jfl r -t 5*i and ethics, 93. 
127, 596; and Greek philoso- 
pher*. 67, 82, 83, 86, 93. 12$. 
126, 253, 176; and justice, 137-$; 
and knowledge, i$?~8, 17* i and 
mathematics, 232; and Nietz- 
sche. 789; prosecution and death 
of. Hi, &*, 99, tot, 102, 104-9. 
54 I 55-6, 1*4, *6, *77, 597; 
and soul, no. 156, 157. 158* 
I59jf., 7*; and subjectivity, 
3*o 37$; and theory of ideas, 
149 

Soiasons, 4SB 

aokr system, 666, 731 



solipsism, 682, 729, 744 

solitude, 707-8 

Solomon, 329, 337 

Solon, 78, 79, 139, 5*9, 53* 

Song of Solomon, 361 

Sophia, 344 

Sophist, Tte (Plato), 74, 96 

Sophistici EUnchi (Aristotle), 462 

Sophists, 78, 84, 88, 93, 94, 96, 98, 
99, xoo, 102, 105, 137, 256 

Sophocles, 38, 77, 100 

Soracte, 4x1 

Sorbonne, 716 n., 748 

Sorel, Georges, 8x9 

soul, 22, 347, 480, 488, 497, 594, 
606, 607, 688, 840; and Aristotle, 
188, 192 ff., 195, 3X7, 480, 585, 
590 ; and St. Augustine, 366, 370, 
379, 381, 3^4 ; and Averroes, 447, 
475; and body, 22, 41, 5t *56, 
192-4; and Cartesians, 583, 587, 
590; in Christian theology, 365- 
6; and Epicurus, 269-70; and 
Greeks, 35, 37, 41, 46, 61, 86, 91, 
92; and Plato, 146, 156, 159^-. 
165, 166, 169-70, 276; and 
Pkmnus, 312-19; and Pythag- 
oras, 50, 51, 163; and Reforma- 
tion, 545; and Socrates, 109, 
156, 157, 160-3; and Stoics, 276, 
280-1. See also immortality; 
resurrection ; transmigration 

sounds, 174* 178, 675, 679 

South America, 560, 765 

South Russia, 342 

South Sea Islands, 657 

Southern France, 4^> 

Southern Italy, 326, 415, 4*7, 4.13, 
440 ; Greeks in, 26, 27. 41, 47, 49, 
50, 59, 67, 73, 77, 139 

Southey, Robert, 705 

sovereignty, 573-4 

Soviet Russia, 659, 746, 848 

pace, 55, 5, 80-90, 151* 49O, 680, 
694, 75**, 78>; and Bergson, 
822 ff. t 828 #, 837; and Kant, 
734, 735, 739-44, 73J .and 
Leibniz, oo, 607; modern views 
on, 90-1, 7435 and Newton, 40, 
91, 561, 743 ; and Plato, 168, 170; 
and quantum theory, 86x; and 
time and principle of individu- 
stion, 489^00 



909 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



pace-time, 178, 562 
Spain, 48, 49, 139. 281, 294, 320, 
401, 460, 592, 626, 647; Arians 
in, 354; under Charles V, 577, 
746; conquests of, in America, 
22, 644; and Counter-Reforma- 
tion, 544, 546; feared, 621; and 
Inquisition, 470; and Italy, 513, 
57, 519. Sao, 528; and Jews, 
343, 44&-9. 4?o; missionaries of, 
388; and Mohammedans, 299, 
3<>6, 307, 3^6, 419. 440, 442, 443, 
446, 448; and papacy, 518; mon- 
archy in, 325, 413; and Rome, 
305 

Sparta, 27, 28, 31, 77, 99, *95. 79* ; 
and Athens, 31 n., 79, 99, ico, 
101, 103; influence of, 114-24; 
and Machiavelli, 529, 532; and 
Plato, 124, 125, 136, 139; and 
Rousseau, 714, 721 

Spengler, Oswald, 762 

spermatozoa, 557 

Sphaerus, 292 

Spinoza, 56, 310, 465, 592-603. 
604, 783, 794, 8i4, 857; nd 
Descartes, 583, 593. 594*. nd 
ethics, 592, 593 #. 669; nd 
God, 144, 191, 45 * 59*. 594, 
595 ff-> 6*9; *nd Hegel, 514, 
758, 762, 769; n Holland, 580, 
592; influence of, 667; and 
Leibniz, 592, 604, 605, 606, 607, 
616; and logic, 594. 599. 600- 1, 
618; and Maimomdes, 343. 449 ; 
pantheism of t 373, 594; and 
State, 593, ^66; and subjectiv* 
*sm, 513; and substance, 594, 
600*1, 606, 614 

spirit, 312, 313, 323, 345. 348; nd 
Hegel, 761, 762, 763. 7<4, 767, 
812 

Spirituals, 471, 49i 

Spoleto, 307 

Stagyra, 182 * 

Stalm, 667, 84* 

wi, 45. *J, *35. 3179, 36, 34, 
3*9, S4&; *nd Aristarchua, 238; 
'and Aristotle, 230; and Hotinus, 
3'4, 319 

States), 2, 302, 51 1. 579, 664, 754. 

770, 808, 817; alternative to 

snardiy, 57, 579; and St. 



State(s) conld. 

Ambrose, 354, 3555 <* Aris- 
totle, 183, 208-9, 210-if, 214-15 ; 
Athenian, 78, 154-5; becomes 
Christian, 348, 352; Corporate, 
725; dictatorial, 624; and Fas- 
cism or Nazism, iff, 798, 813; 
and Fichte, 730; 'and Hegel, 730, 
706-9, 770, 771; and Hobbes, 
,68, 577 J Jewish, 333, 3** ; Kant 
recommends federation of, 738; 
and Locke, 652, 664; and Mace- 
donians, 253; and Machiavelli, 
568 ; and Marxism, 813 ; modern, 
127, 200, 511; and Nietzsche, 
791 ; and Origen, 348; and Plato, 
126, 127, 133, 136, 139, 210; and 
Protestants, 493. 545* 5***; re- 
ligion, in antiquity, 23, 38, 40, 
50, 262, 284; and Routseau, 
720/7".; and Socrates, 103, 105, 
107, 108, 173; Spartan, 115, 116, 
1 1 8 ; universal, 305 ; world, 76$- 
9. Set oho Church ; totalitarian 
ism 

state of nature, 647 ff. t 664. 714, 
722 

States of the Church, 1 20, 4 u 

stellar parallax, 548 

Stendhal, 778 

Stephen 111, Pope, 410 

Stephen IX, Pope, 433 

Steyr. 534 

Stockholm, 582 

Stau and Epicurean Phdatophtn? 
THt (Gates), 266, 286 

Stoic Pkdt>toph\ . Th* (Murray), 
276 

Stoicism, 241, 53, 55. * 6 5. *75- 
93. 3*, 34<, 377. 6oa; and 
Academy, 261, 276, 282; and 
Boethius, 390; and brotherhood 
of man, 286, 287* 30$; and 
Christianity, 280, 282. 283, 287, 
288, 291, 393< 3*&;c<Mniupoliian, 
243, 813; and determinism, 276, 
280, 289; and Epicureanism, 
363, 264, 374, 275; nd ethics, 
275, 281, 189, 191-1; and 
Fathers of the Church, 322 ; and 

* God, 277, W, 7. ***> W>, 
14 ; and individualism, 622 ; and 
337; and majority, 199; 



910 



INDEX 



Stoicism contd. 
and materialism, 275, 276, 281 ; 
and Philo, 342; and Plato, 275, 
276, 280, 282, 287-8, 292; and 
Plotinus, 311; and politics, 253, 
299; in Rome, 275, 281, 282^., 
209-3*) ; Ad ocrates, in, 276, 
277 ; and soul, 276, 280, 317 ; and 
Spinoza, 598; and theology, 289, 
320; and virtue, 277-8, 279, 28*)- 

Stous and Sceptics (Bevan), 59 n., 
258 n., 282 it. 

Stowe, Harriet Beechcr, 791 

Strachey, Lytton, 563 

Stratford, Earl of, 569, 577 

Stridon, 360 

strife. 61, 62. 63, 74, 76, 135 

Strindberg. August, 708 

struggle for existence, 752, 753, 808 

Stuarts. 359*., 626, 644, 645, 66 1 

subject, 175, 811-12; and object, 
689. 837, 840 

Subjective Idea, 761 

subjectivism, subjectivity, 253, 256, 
320, 374, 513-U, 586, 72^-30, 
735, 739, 740, 813. 846 

substance, oo. 167, 224-5. 614, 

634-5, 6Ho, 734. 763, H6o; and 

Anstotlc, 185-93. 221, 224; and 

JVftcartes, 594. 614; and early 

Greek philosophy. 45-** 47. 60, 

65. 7 1 . 74, 90 ; and Hume, 687-8 ; 

^nnd Lcibms, 606. 614; and 

'principle of individuation, 490; 

and Sptnosa, 594, 600, 614 

success, 530-1 

succession, and causality, 692, 695 

tutfenng. 7*3, 797-9 

sufficient reason, 615 

Sufi sect, 444 

Miicide, 155. 37*. 4<>9. 737, 7&4. 785 

Sutdgrr of Hamberg, 433 

Sumenans, 22 

Summa contra GV***/*i, 475-83 

S'wwww Tfoofafio*. 475, 477 

*un, 24, 66, 230, 239. 280, S$tff<, 
561. 862; and Artstftrchus. 153* 
237, 138. and Bmhe, 551; and 
Copernicus, 547 B*\ <* t)w| - 
cartrs. 585 ; and St. Francis, 47 1 : 
as god, 2127, 303, 331, 539; 1 
Greek philosophers. A 73< 8l ^ 



aun contd. 

83, 91, 280, 282, 312; and 
Gnosticism, 315 ; and Heraclides, 
237; and Jews, 338; and Kepler, 
*53 55i > and Manichaeism, 369; 
and Plotinus, 314, 319; and Py- 
thagoreans, 236; and Socrates, 
107; worship of, 230 

Sun Goddess, 644 

Sunni, 442 

superman, 788, 795. 796 

superstition(s) : in antiquity, 28, 32, 
76, 93 241, 243, 250, 263, 302, 
320; in dark ages, 326, 386, 395 ; 
in Renaissance, 516, 523; and 
science, 76, 549 

Supremacy, Act of, 539 

Supreme, the, 3x3, 319 

Supreme Court (U.S.) 577, 664 

surprise, as test of error, 850 

survival of the fittest, 73, 228, 752, 
753, 808 

Sweden, 582 

Swedenborg, Emanuel, 705, 732 

Swift, Jonathan, 673 

Swineshead, 495 it. 

Switzerland, 788 

Sybaris, 49 

syllogism(s), 218^., 225, 281, 565 

Sylvester I (St.), Pope, 411-12 

Sylvester II (Gerbert), Pope, 404, 

4<>8, 430, 437 

symbols, and mathematics, 177, 
178 

Symmachus, court official, 356, 392 

Symmachua, statesman, 356, 369, 
392 

sympathy, 799 

Symporium (Plato), 100, no, 312 

synagogues, 332 

syncretism, 346 

syndicalism, 819 

Synoptic Gospels, 309, 346 

syntax, 176, 178, l|6, 859* 

synthesis, 324. 4991 and Hegel, 759 

Syracuse. 100, 126. 139, 144 214, 
240, 204, 403 

Syria, 22, 24, 27, 120, 241, 245* 
281, 303, 3^9, 409,499; neresy 
in, 353; rod Mohammedans, 
306, 440. 4431 monaaticism 
in, 395~7; Nestorianism in, 388 ^ 
and Stoicism, 275 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



tabula rasa, 749 

Tacitus, 245, 283, 765 

Tammany, 94 

Tammuz, 331 

Tang dynasty, 419 

Tantalos, 30 

Taoists, 255 

Taos,a64 

Taranto, 139 

Taras, 139 

Tarn, W. W., 245, 248, 275, 282 

Tartars, 560 

Tartessus, 48 

Taurobolium, 350 

Tawney, R. H., 209, 648, 660 

taxation, 656 

technique, 514, 754. 855 

Teheran, 445 

teleologies! argument, 484 

teleologies! explanations, 87, 126, 

565 

teleology, i&9. 228. 821 
Teles, 255, 256 
telescope, 55^. 557 
temperance, 804 
Templars, 503 
Temple of Jerusalem, 330, 331, 

332. 335. 341. 359 
temples, 375 

Ten Commandments, 330, 341 
Teraunists, 534 
terms, 495-6 
Tertullian, 279, 338 
Testament* of the Twehe Patriarchs, 

339-42 

Teutamus, 60 
Thales, 21, 43-5, 47, 62, 208, 231, 

235, 37? 

Theaetetus, 232, 234 ! 

TheafUtut (Plato), 63, 97, 17 iff., \ 

497. 634, 860 I 

Thebaid, 395 
Thebes, 118, 119 
theism, f 18, 8tL 
tt*occy, 333, 382 
Thcodebert, King of the Franks, 

4<>3 
Theodettnda, wife of King Agi- 



TModors, 393 

Theodore, archbishop of Canter- P 

bury, 422 I 

Theodora, King of the Franks, 403 ! 



Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths, 

386, 389, 392-3. 405. 765 
Theodoras, 232 
Theodosius I, 352, 353, 357. 358, 

359. 377. 575 

theology, 22, 53, 56, 138, 152, 222; 
and Aristotle, 190! arlU Aver- 
roists, 475; ana barbarian ele- 
ments in Rome, 408; and Hera* 
fditus, 61-2; Orphic, 35, 41-2; 
and Plato, 133-4; and Plotinus, 
308; and Pythagoras, 56; and 
Stoicism, 275, 277, 289; and 
substance, 71 ; and Xenophancs, 
59. See oho Christian theology 
Thcophylact, 417 
theorem, Pythagorean, 54, 232 
theoretical philosophies, 8 19,, 820 
theories and pragmatism, 844 
theory, 52 

theory of descriptions, 859 
theory of duration, 834-6 
theory of ideas, 125, 141-53, 162, 

184-6, 188. 276, 424, 43-^ 
theory of knowledge, 699; and 
Abelard, 459; and Aristotk, 220, 
222 ; and Bergaon, 835 ; and Des- 
cartes, 587-8; and Dewey. 848; 
errors in, 53, 220-1; and Hel- 
vethis, 749; and Hume. 729; and 
James ,840- 1 ; and Locke, 628-4* , 
729 ; and ma thematic*, 5 3 , 848 ; in 
modern philosophy, 5 13- 14; and 
Occam, 494 jET ; and perception, 
680-2 ;and Plato, 292 ; and prag- 
matists, 855; and Sophist*. 93; 
and Stoics, 281, 292. SYr alto 
knowledge 

theory of memory, 834-6 
theory of population, 750, 751, 

808 
theory of relativity, 239. 490. 742, 

860,861 
"There," 317 n. 
Thermidor, 729 
thermometer, 557 
Thermopylae, 118 
Theseus, 525 
thesis, 759 

Theaaalomca, 359, 575 
Thmaly, 154 

thing(s), 66, 490, 495, 406, 504. 
f *a6, 833, 836, 860 



INDEX 



things-in-themselves, 734, 74", 744. 

783 

third man, 150, 184 
Thirty Tyrants, 101, 103, 108, 125 
Thirty Years' War, 546, 580, 747 
Thomas, St. See Aquinas 
Thomas*of Celqpo, 471 
Thomists, 534 
Thoreau, Henry David, 705 
Thrace, 32, 33, 35, 41, 59, 469 | 
Thrasymachus, 99, 137, 138. 139 
Three Chapters, heresy of, 393, 

401,403 

Thucydides, 363, 569 

Thurii, 97, 139, 246 

Thus Spake Zarathustra (Nietz- 
sche), 792 

Thysstca, 30 

thyrsus-bearers, 159 

Tieck, Ludwtg, 782 

Tigris, 22, 245 

Timaeus (Plato), 165-70, 234, 316, 
390, 439*449. 55> 

time, 694, $, 827, 834; and 
Aristotle, 222, 229; and St. 
Augustine. 372, 373-4. 378; and 
Bcrgson. 823, 826. 828. 831-4, 
835* 837; and Einstein, 90; and 
eternity. 55. 65 ; and Hegel. 758, 
762 ; and John the Scot, 426 ; and 
Hume. 689, 604; and Kant, 734. 
73$. 739-44. 7*3, g 59". and 
Newton. 562; and Parmenides, 

9 65; and Plato, 143, 166-7, 170; 
and poet*, 64-5; and principle 
of indtviduatton. 489-90; and 
quantum theory, 861 ; and Scho- 
penhauer, 783; and Spinoza, 
596; and theology, 151. See also 
space; space time 

Tim* and Fw Will (Uergson), 823, 
827, 829 

Timon, 257-8 

Titans. 35 

Toledo, 461 

Toleration, Act of, 627 

Tolstoy, 254* a$S. 3*4* 77* 

Topics (Aristotle), 462 

Tomcelli, 357 

torture, 290, 381 

totalitarianism, 115, 646, 654, 

7S, 745 
totality, 734 



touch, 826 

Toulouse, 469 

tournaments, 324 

Tours, 409 

Tower of London, 502, 539, 563, 

569 

trade, 209, 703 
trade unions, 575, 725, 752 
traditionalism, 746, 752, 804 
tragedy, 37, 77 
Trajan, 297, 300 
transcendental argument, 739-40, 

742 
translations, 421-2, 427, 448, 461- 

2, 508. See also Greek language; 

Latin language ; Vulgate 
transmigration of souls, 35, 50, 59, 

167, 170, 192, 223, 468, 784 
transubstantiation, 420, 437, 491, 

508, 535, 576 
Treatise of Human Nature (Hume), 



Treatises on Government (Locke), 

628, 642, 646, 647 ff. 
Treitschke, Heinrich von, 748 
Trent, Council of, 517, 545, 548 
Trevelyan, R. C., cited, 271 it., 

273 

Treves, 355. 810 
triadic movement, 758, 760 
triads, 858 

triangles, 54, 168-9, 170 
trigonometry, 238 
Trinity, 312, 352, 389, 425, 441, 

457, 535 ; and Abelard, 458, 459; 

and Aquinas, 476, 482; and Plo- 

tinus, 312,314,43* 

Trinity College, 673 

Trojan Women, The (Euripides), 
101 

Trotsky, Leon, 848 

Troy, 30, 161, 351, 375 

true, the, 52, 496 

truth, 52, 58, 144^259, 4* w-t 755. 
TOO, 848-53; and Aquinas, 475. 
476, 478* 485; and Copemican 
hypothesis, 239; and Dewey, 
848-53; and dialectic method, 
113; double, 475. 54; ** 
ethics, 138; and Galileo, 139; 
and geometry, 146; and Hegel, 
761, 767; and Hobbes, 571 ; and 
Hume, 696, 7.13; nd industrial- 



Oil 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



truth contd. 

ism, 52; and James, 842-3, 845- 
6; and John the Scot, 423 ; and 
Locke, 631 ; and logical analysis, 
864; and Marx, 81 1 ; and mathe- 
matics, 55, 177; and moral con- 
siderations, 98; and Nietzsche, 
777; and object-subject relation, 
840; and Parmcnides, 67; and 
past and future, 854; and per- 
ception, 173-5 ; and philosophy, 
309, 813, 863; and Plato, 142, 
144, 146, 147, 377; and Pro- 
tagoras, 97, 173; *n<* science, 
550, 606, 733 ; and Socrates, 164; 
and words, 70; and Xenophanes, 

59 

Tully, 368. See also Cicero 
Turin, 404, 712 
Turks, 299, 445 5<>7, 5<>9> 5 '7, 5*3. | 

560 i 

Tusculum, 417. 432 I 

Tyler, Wat, 508 
tyranny, 27, 72. 79, 211-12. 295, 

302 ! 

Tyre, 243 j 



Ucberwcg. Friedrich, 275. 446, 457 

Ulphihs (Ulfila). 405 

Umayyad dynasty, 442 

Unam Sanctum, 502 

unified wholes, 851 

United States, 121, 309, 470, 655, , 
657, 663, 664, 750 

unity, 51, 60, 62-3, 221, 413, 734 j 

universality, 492 

tyuvenals: atkd Aristotle, 184*8, ; 
221; and Avicenna, 445; and 
Locke, 634; and Marx, 814; , 
nominalism and, 687 ; and Plato, 
125, 148, 149. I77J and Porphy- | 
ry, 488; and scholastics, 424* 
45*. 4J7. 459, 4*1, 47. 4*0, 4&4, 
496-7 f 

univene, 57. 229, 2*8* 289* 5#3 
759, 772, 7*7, 828, 862; and 
Brrgson. 820. 822, 838; and 

Copernicus, 546-9 ; in Greek 
philosophy. 4o, 75 92, 34, *68, 
174, 229. 237, 318 
universities, 461 
unmoved mover, 229, 477 
Upmiahads, 781 ! 



Urban II, Pope, 450, 451 

Urban V, Pope, 505 

Urban VI, Pope, 505 

Ure, P. N., 27 n. 

Uriah, 575 

U.S.S.R., 130 

usury* 209-10, 64^. 681 * 

utilitarianism, utilitarians, 205, 653, 

671, 730, 736, 749, 801-9 
Utilitarianism (John Stuart Mill), 

805-6 
Utopia(s), 124, 129-40, 210-11 f 

539-43 
Utopia (More), 539-43 

Vaihinger, 742 
Vakntinian 1, Emperor, 356 
Valentinian II, Emperor, 355- 356 
Valla, Lorenzo, 411, 519, 534 
vahie{s), 707, 77<>-i, 774. 86*; 

labour theory of, 660 
Vandals, 353, 363, 386, 3^, 405. 

Vanessa, 673 

Vasacur, 'Hiereae kr, 713 

Vaughan, Henry. 65, 166 if. 

vegetarianism, 469 

Venice, 394. 454. 45 6 * 4<4. 5 6 * 

5*7, 574. 7*3 
Venus, 237, 555 

veracity, 842. 843 

VerctUii, Madame dc, 712 
Verona, 386 ; Council of, 470 
Waalius, Andnraa, 566 9 

Vichy, 819 
Victor II. Pope, 433 
Victor IV, Antipopr, 454 n 
Victory, 356, 392 
Vigna. Pirtro deila. See 1'ictro delb 

Vigna 
Vmci. Ixronardo da, 510. 512, 516. 

violence. 671, 707, 75 

Virgil, 297, 3*2 

Virgil, bishop of Sabtburg, 414 

Virgin, 23, 333, 387, 3* H * 535 

virginity, 356, 359. 361. 363. 376, 

385 

virtue, 33, 200, 213, 320, 329. 802, 
and Anatotle, 195-201, 203, 211. 
213, 216; and St. Atiffuiinr, 379. 
380; and Cynics, 255; and 
ethical thrones/ 199*200; and 



INDEX 



virtue omfcf. 

Jews, 328-*, 335; and Kant, 
737; and Machiavelli, 531; and 
Nietzsche, 790-1 ; and Socrates, 
ii i ; and Stoka, in, 199, 277-9, 
280, 286, 290-1 

Vjacontif 516* 

Visigoths, 386, *oi, 404, 405, 440 

Vita Nvova 9 La (Dante), 390 

void, 82, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 220, 
269 w 

Voltaire, 604, 619, 629, 666, 720, 
748; and Rouaaeau, 715, 716 

Vulgate, 342, 354, 360, 380, 508, 
533. 535 

wage-earner, 811, 816 

Wagner, Wilhelm Richard, 708, 



2 35, 402; 



Waiblingen, 465 

Waldenaea, 469 

Waldo, Peter, 469 

Wallace. William, 761 

Wallia, John, 5 ?o 

Walther von der Vogelweide, 464 

war, 136, 520^-1, 579, 650, 652, 657, 
672, 782; in antiquity, 77, 234, 
247, 248; and Aristotle, 203, 209, 
214, 215 ; aa competitive method, 
664. 808; and economics, 815; 
nd Hegel, 766, 768-9; and 
tiefftditua, 60-1 , 63 ; and Hobbes, 
57, 573. 5791 d Kant, 73*; 
and Locke, 671 ; and More, 541- 

2; and Nietzsche, 779, 789, 79* , 
794* 795. 797; nd Plato, 131, 
3*. *59; of religion, 544* 546, 
622, 702 ; and Rouiaeau, 714; and 
Sparta. 115,116. 117, n8, "9 

War ami /Vor* (Tolstoy), 77$ 

Warms, Madame de, 712 

Waahington, George, 778 

water, 45, 46, 47. 59. 13*. *76; and 
Aristotle, 229*30; and Empc- 
docfea, 62, 74; and Heraclitua, 
61, 63; and Plato, 166-9; and 
Thalea, 4*, 43-5. ** 

Waterloo, 778 

wealth. 27. 3*. 443 

Weiemnsaa, Kari Theodor, 234* 



Wtlf t 465 



were-wolves, 32 

West, 41, 43, * W 5 *35, ^f***i 
division of East and, 349; and 
Nicene orthodoxy, 353 
Western Church, 394, 416, 464, 

501 ; Doctors of, 354 jf. 
Western Empire, 302, 355, 393, 
408, 412, 765; Christianity tri- 
umphs in, 353 ; and East, 302-4; 
fall of, 325, 327, 353, 383, 3^6. 
387, 406, 419, 428, 440 
Whitehead. A. N., 819, 859 
whole(s), 594, 75, 76o, 761, 762, 

770, 851 
widows, 360 

will, 200, 227, 320, 572, 594, 786, 
787, 818; of all, 724, 725 *-, 
727 n., 767; and St. Augustine, 
370, 378, 379; to believe, 842-6; 
and Kant, 291, 737, 783; and 
romanticism, 751, 752; and 
Schopenhauer, 780, 782-7; and 
Stoicism, 277, 289, 290. See alto 
free will; general will 
Will to Believe, The (James), 842 
Witt to Power, The (Nietzsche), 792 
William the Conqueror, 435, 437 
William II of Germany, 706 
William III of England, 627 
VTilliam of Champeaux, 458 
William of Malmesbury, 423 
William of Moerbeke, 475 
William of Occam. See Occam 
William the Pious, 431 
Wilson, Woodrow, 573 
, wine, 37, 44 
I witchcraft, 523, 558 
j Wolf, A., 557 n. 
Wolf, Baron von, 618, 731 
Wolsey, Thomas, Cardinal, 539 
women, 33, 131, 157, 4*7, 6 55, 75, 
782, 804; in Greece, 26, 92, 95. 
116, 119, 208; and Nietzsche, 
79i , 79*. 795 1 tB.d Plate? 37, 132, 
167, 170, 211 ; HP Rome, 293, 301 
Word, 56, 370, 478 
words, 113, 174, 176-7. 306, 566, 
571, 771-2; and Aristotle, i85-7 a 
220-1, 223-4; geqfral, 143* *4*- 
9; and logic, 220*1, 223-4, 496, 
614 ; and logical analysis, 859-60; 
and meaning, 68-9, 175-' 
i, 77- 



915 



WESTERN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 



Wordsworth, 705 
working-class movements, 817 



world(s), 46, go, 162, 604, 612-13, 
618, 734, 862; end of, 277, 418 

World o$ Witt and Idta> The 
(Schopenhauer), 782 

world-animal, 165-6, 170 

world-conflagration, 277, 282 

world federation, 739 

world government, 768 

world State, 768, 769 

Worms: Concordat of, 452; Coun- 
cil of, 436 

writing, 22, 27-8 

Wyclifle, John, 504, 506. 507-9 

Xenophanes, 31, 58, 59, 60 
Xenophon, 102-4, no, 247 
Xerxes, 77, 100, 119, 3<>4 

Yahweh, 330-1, 334* 344. 346, 365, 

383 
Yaqub Al-Mansur, 446 



Yaqub Yusuf, Abu, 446 
Yonas, 245 
York, 414, 415. 455 
Yorkshire, 414-15 

Zacharias or Zachary (St.), Pope, 

414*575^ . 

Zagrcus, 36 

Zarathustra. Be* Zoroaster 
Zealots, 341 

ZeUer, Eduard, 84. 85, 98, 188 
Zeno, Emperor, 444 
Zeno of Citmm, 263, 275-6, 279- 

80, 281, 292 
Zeno the Ekatic, 84, 112, 149, 

$33-4 

Zeu. 23, 35, 39, 236, 242, 272, 334; 
and fate, 29, 134, 855; and 
Socrates, 77, 105 n. ; and Stoics, 
277. 279. 280, 286, 287, 288 

Zeus Lykaios, 32 

xoology, 444 

Zorosster or Zanthustra, Zoroas* 
trians, 30. 241, 3<H, 345. 44L 777 



916' 



